GALE
The
ENCYCLOPEDIA
M
EDICINE
of
SECOND EDITION
G ALE
The
ENCYCLOPEDIA
M
EDICINE
of
SECOND EDITION
V O L U M E
2
C-F
JACQUELINE L. LONGE, EDITOR
DEIRDRE S. BLANCHFIELD, ASSOCIATE EDITOR
GALE
The Since this page cannot legibly accommodate all copyright notices,the
acknowledgments constitute an extension of the copyright notice.
ENCYCLOPEDIA
While every effort has been made to ensure the reliability of the infor-
MEDICINE mation presented in this publication,the Gale Group neither guarantees
of
the accuracy of the data contained herein nor assumes any responsibili-
SECOND EDITION ty for errors,omissions or discrepancies. The Gale Group accepts no
payment for listing,and inclusion in the publication of any organiza-
tion,agency,institution,publication,service,or individual does not
imply endorsement of the editor or publisher. Errors brought to the
attention of the publisher and verified to the satisfaction of the publish-
STAFF
er will be corrected in future editions.
Jacqueline L. Longe,Project Editor
This book is printed on recycled paper that meets Environmental Pro-
Deirdre S. Blanchfield,Associate Editor tection Agency standards.
Christine B. Jeryan,Managing Editor
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of
American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence
Donna Olendorf,Senior Editor
Paper for Printed Library Materials,ANSI Z39.48-1984.
Stacey Blachford,Associate Editor
Kate Kretschmann,Melissa C. McDade,Ryan This publication is a creative work fully protected by all applicable
copyright laws,as well as by misappropriation,trade secret,unfair com-
Thomason,Assistant Editors
petition,and other applicable laws. The authors and editor of this work
have added value to the underlying factual material herein through one
Mark Springer,Technical Specialist
or more of the following:unique and original selection,coordination,
Andrea Lopeman,Programmer/Analyst
expression,arrangement,and classification of the information.
Barbara J. Yarrow,Manager,Imaging and Multimedia Gale Group and design is a trademark used herein under license.
Content
All rights to this publication will be vigorously defended.
Robyn V. Young,Project Manager,Imaging and
Copyright ©2002
Multimedia Content
Gale Group
Dean Dauphinais,Senior Editor,Imaging and
27500 Drake Road
Multimedia Content Farmington Hills,MI 48331-3535
Kelly A. Quin,Editor,Imaging and Multimedia Content
All rights reserved including the right of reproduction in whole or in
Leitha Etheridge-Sims,Mary K. Grimes,Dave Oblender,
part in any form.
Image Catalogers
ISBN 0-7876-5489-2 (set)
Pamela A. Reed,Imaging Coordinator
0-7876-5490-6 (Vol. 1)
Randy Bassett,Imaging Supervisor
0-7876-5491-4 (Vol. 2)
Robert Duncan,Senior Imaging Specialist 0-7876-5492-2 (Vol. 3)
Dan Newell,Imaging Specialist 0-7876-5493-0 (Vol. 4)
Christine O’Bryan,Graphic Specialist 0-7876-5494-9 (Vol. 5)
Printed in the United States of America
Maria Franklin,Permissions Manager
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Margaret A. Chamberlain,Permissions Specialist
Michelle DiMercurio,Senior Art Director
Mike Logusz,Graphic Artist Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gale encyclopedia of medicine / Jacqueline L. Longe,editor;
Mary Beth Trimper,Manager,Composition and
Deirdre S. Blanchfield,associate editor — 2nd ed.
Electronic Prepress
p. cm.
Evi Seoud,Assistant Manager,Composition Purchasing
Includes bibliographical references and index.
and Electronic Prepress Contents:Vol. 1. A-B — v. 2. C-F — v. 3.
Dorothy Maki,Manufacturing Manager G-M — v. 4. N-S — v. 5. T-Z.
Wendy Blurton,Senior Manufacturing Specialist ISBN 0-7876-5489-2 (set:hardcover) — ISBN 0-7876-5490-6
(vol. 1) — ISBN 0-7876-5491-4 (vol. 2) — ISBN 0-7876-5492-2
(vol. 3) — ISBN 0-7876-5493-0 (vol. 4) — ISBN 0-7876-5494-9
(vol. 5)
1. Internal medicine—Encyclopedias. I. Longe,Jacqueline L.
II. Blanchfield,Deirdre S. III. Gale Research Company.
RC41.G35 2001
616’.003—dc21
2001051245
CONTENTS
Introduction ix
....................................................
Advisory Board xi
..............................................
Contributors xiii
.................................................
Entries
Volume 1:A-B.............................................. 1
Volume 2:C-F.......................................... 625
Volume 3:G-M....................................... 1375
Volume 4:N-S........................................ 2307
Volume 5:T-Z........................................ 3237
Organizations 3603
............................................
General Index 3625
............................................
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 V
PLEASE READ—IMPORTANT INFORMATION
The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2is a medical ref- kind, including without limitation, warranties of mer-
erence product designed to inform and educate readers chantability or fitness for a particular purpose,nor does it
about a wide variety of disorders,conditions,treatments, guarantee the accuracy,comprehensiveness,or timeliness
and diagnostic tests. The Gale Group believes the product of the information contained in this product. Readers
to be comprehensive,but not necessarily definitive. It is should be aware that the universe of medical knowledge
intended to supplement,not replace,consultation with a is constantly growing and changing,and that differences
physician or other healthcare practitioner. While the Gale of medical opinion exist among authorities. Readers are
Group has made substantial efforts to provide information also advised to seek professional diagnosis and treatment
that is accurate,comprehensive,and up-to-date,the Gale for any medical condition, and to discuss information
Group makes no representations or warranties of any obtained from this book with their health care provider.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 VII
INTRODUCTION
The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 (GEM2) is a this approach has come to be known as alternative medi-
one-stop source for medical information on nearly 1,700 cine. The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 includes a
common medical disorders,conditions,tests,and treat- number of essays on alternative therapies,ranging from
ments, including high-profile diseases such as AIDS, traditional Chinese medicine to homeopathy and from
Alzheimer’s disease,cancer,and heart attack. This ency- meditation to aromatherapy. In addition to full essays on
clopedia avoids medical jargon and uses language that alternative therapies,the encyclopedia features specific
laypersons can understand, while still providing thor- Alternative treatmentsections for diseases and condi-
ough coverage of each topic. The Gale Encyclopedia of tions that may be helped by complementary therapies.
Medicine 2 fills a gap between basic consumer health
resources,such as single-volume family medical guides,
and highly technical professional materials. INCLUSION CRITERIA
A preliminary list of diseases,disorders,tests and treat-
SCOPE ments was compiled from a wide variety of sources,
including professional medical guides and textbooks as
Almost 1,700 full-length articles are included in the
well as consumer guides and encyclopedias. The general
Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2,including disorders/
advisory board, made up of public librarians, medical
conditions, tests/procedures, and treatments/therapies.
librarians and consumer health experts,evaluated the top-
Many common drugs are also covered,with generic drug
ics and made suggestions for inclusion. The list was sorted
names appearing first and brand names following in
by category and sent to GEM2medical advisors,certified
parentheses,eg. acetaminophen (Tylenol). Throughout
physicians with various medical specialities,for review.
the Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2,many prominent
Final selection of topics to include was made by the med-
individuals are highlighted as sidebar biographies that
ical advisors in conjunction with the Gale Group editor.
accompany the main topical essays. Articles follow a
standardized format that provides information at a
glance. Rubrics include:
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS
Disorders/Conditions Tests/Treatments
The essays were compiled by experienced medical
Definition Definition writers,including physicians,pharmacists,nurses,and
Description Purpose other health care professionals. GEM2medical advisors
Causes and symptoms Precautions reviewed the completed essays to insure that they are
Diagnosis Description appropriate,up-to-date,and medically accurate.
Treatment Preparation
Alternative treatment Aftercare
Prognosis Risks HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
Prevention Normal/Abnormal results
The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 has been
Resources Resources
designed with ready reference in mind.
Key terms Key terms
• Straight alphabetical arrangementallows users to
In recent years there has been a resurgence of interest
locate information quickly.
in holistic medicine that emphasizes the connection
between mind and body. Aimed at achieving and main- • Bold-faced terms function as print hyperlinks that
taining good health rather than just eliminating disease, point the reader to related entries in the encyclopedia.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 IX
• Cross-referencesplaced throughout the encyclopedia • Resources sectiondirects users to additional sources
direct readers to where information on subjects with- of medical information on a topic.
out entries can be found. Synonyms are also cross-ref-
• A comprehensive general indexallows users to easily
erenced.
target detailed aspects of any topic, including Latin
names.
• A list of key termsare provided where appropriate to
define unfamiliar terms or concepts.
GRAPHICS
• Valuable contact informationfor organizations and
support groups is included with each entry. The The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 is enhanced
appendix contains an extensive list of organizations with over 675 color images, including photos, charts,
arranged in alphabetical order. tables,and customized line drawings.
X GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitcudortnI
ADVISORY BOARD
A number of experts in the library and medical communities provided invaluable assistance in the formulation of this ency-
clopedia. Our advisory board performed a myriad of duties,from defining the scope of coverage to reviewing individual
entries for accuracy and accessibility. The editor would like to express her appreciation to them.
MEDICAL ADVISORS Consultant Psychotherapist in The Permanente Medical Group
Private Practice Richmond,CA
A. Richard Adrouny,M.D.,
Lathrup Village,MI
F.A.C.P. Amy B. Tuteur,M.D.
Clinical Assistant Professor of L. Anne Hirschel,D.D.S. Sharon,MA
Medicine Southfield,MI
Division of Oncology
Stanford University Larry I. Lutwick M.D.,F.A.C.P. LIBRARIAN ADVISORS
Director of Medical Oncology Director,Infectious Diseases Maureen O. Carleton,MLIS
Community Hospital of Los Gatos- VA Medical Center Medical Reference Specialist
Saratoga Brooklyn,NY King County Library System
Los Gatos,CA Bellevue,WA
Ira Michelson,M.D.,M.B.A.,
Laurie Barclay,M.D. F.A.C.O.G. Elizabeth Clewis Crim,MLS
Neurological Consulting Services Physician and Clinical Instructor Collection Specialist
Tampa,FL University of Michigan Prince William Public Library,VA
Ann Arbor,MI
Kenneth J. Berniker,M.D. Valerie J. Lawrence,MLS
Attending Physician Susan Mockus,M.D. Assistant Librarian
Emergency Department Scientific Consultant Western States Chiropractic
Kaiser Permanente Medical Center Seattle,WA College
Vallejo,CA Portland,OR
Ralph M. Myerson,M.D.,
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,M.D. F.A.C.P. Barbara J. O’Hara,MLS
Durham,NC Clinical Professor of Medicine Adult Services Librarian
Medical College of Pennsylvania– Free Library of Philadelphia,PA
Robin Dipasquale,N.D.
Hahnemann University
Clinical Faculty Alan M. Rees,MLS
Philadelphia,PA
Bastyr University Professor Emeritus
Seattle,WA Case Western Reserve University
Ronald Pies,M.D.
Cleveland,OH
Faye Fishman,D.O. Clinical Professor of Psychiatry
Randolph,NJ Tufts University
School of Medicine
J. Gary Grant,M.D.
Boston,MA
Pacific Grove,CA
Lecturer on Psychiatry
Laith F. Gulli,M.D.
Harvard Medical School
M.Sc.,M.Sc.(MedSci),MSA,
Cambridge,MA
Msc.Psych.,MRSNZ
FRSH,FRIPHH,FAIC,FZS Lee A. Shratter,M.D.
DAPA,DABFC,DABCI Staff Radiologist
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 XI
CONTRIBUTORS
Margaret Alic,Ph.D. Donald G. Barstow,R.N. Maury M. Breecher,Ph.D.
Science Writer Clincal Nurse Specialist Health Communicator/Journalist
Eastsound,WA Oklahoma City,OK Northport,AL
Janet Byron Anderson Carin Lea Beltz,M.S. Ruthan Brodsky
Linguist/Language Consultant Genetic Counselor and Program Medical Writer
Rocky River,OH Director Bloomfield Hills,MI
The Center for Genetic Counseling Tom Brody,Ph.D.
Lisa Andres,M.S.,C.G.C.
Indianapolis,IN Science Writer
Certified Genetic Counselor and
Berkeley,CA
Medical Writer Linda K. Bennington,C.N.S.
San Jose,CA Science Writer Leonard C. Bruno,Ph.D.
Virginia Beach,VA Medical Writer
Greg Annussek
Chevy Chase,MD
Medical Writer/Editor Issac R. Berniker
New York,NY Medical Writer Diane Calbrese
Vallejo,CA Medical Sciences and Technology
Bill Asenjo,M.S.,C.R.C.
Writer
Science Writer Kathleen Berrisford,M.S.V.
Silver Spring,Maryland
Iowa City,IA Science Writer
Richard H. Camer
Sharon A. Aufox,M.S.,C.G.C. Bethanne Black Editor
Genetic Counselor Medical Writer International Medical News Group
Rockford Memorial Hospital Atlanta,GA Silver Spring,MD
Rockford,IL
Jennifer Bowjanowski,M.S., Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,M.D.
Sandra Bain Cushman C.G.C. Medical Writer
Massage Therapist,Alexander Genetic Counselor Durham,NC
Technique Practitioner Children’s Hospital Oakland
Lata Cherath,Ph.D.
Charlottesville,VA Oakland,CA
Science Writing Intern
Howard Baker Michelle Q. Bosworth,M.S.,C.G.C. Cancer Research Institute
Medical Writer Genetic Counselor New York,NY
North York,Ontario Eugene,OR
Linda Chrisman
Laurie Barclay,M.D. Barbara Boughton Massage Therapist and Educator
Neurological Consulting Services Health and Medical Writer Oakland,CA
Tampa,FL El Cerrito,CA
Lisa Christenson,Ph.D.
Jeanine Barone Cheryl Branche,M.D. Science Writer
Nutritionist,Exercise Physiologist Retired General Practitioner Hamden,CT
New York,NY Jackson,MS
Geoffrey N. Clark,D.V.M.
Julia R. Barrett Michelle Lee Brandt Editor
Science Writer Medical Writer Canine Sports Medicine Update
Madison,WI San Francisco,CA Newmarket,NH
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 XIII
Rhonda Cloos,R.N. Thomas Scott Eagan Julie A. Gelderloos
Medical Writer Student Researcher Biomedical Writer
Austin,TX University of Arizona Playa del Rey,CA
Tucson,AZ
Gloria Cooksey,C.N.E Gary Gilles,M.A.
Medical Writer Altha Roberts Edgren Medical Writer
Sacramento,CA Medical Writer Wauconda,IL
Medical Ink
Amy Cooper,M.A.,M.S.I. Harry W. Golden
St. Paul,MN
Medical Writer Medical Writer
Vermillion,SD Karen Ericson,R.N. Shoreline Medical Writers
Medical Writer Old Lyme,CT
David A. Cramer,M.D.
Estes Park,CO
Medical Writer Debra Gordon
Chicago,IL Medical Writer
L. Fleming Fallon Jr.,M.D.,
Nazareth,PA
Dr.PH
Esther Csapo Rastega,R.N.,B.S.N.
Associate Professor of Public
Medical Writer Megan Gourley
Health
Holbrook,MA Writer
Bowling Green State University
Germantown,MD
Arnold Cua,M.D. Bowling Green,OH
Physician Jill Granger,M.S.
Brooklyn,NY Faye Fishman,D.O. Senior Research Associate
Physician University of Michigan
Tish Davidson,A.M.
Randolph,NJ Ann Arbor,MI
Medical Writer
Fremont,California Janis Flores Alison Grant
Medical Writer Medical Writer
Dominic De Bellis,Ph.D.
Lexikon Communications Averill Park,NY
Medical Writer/Editor
Sebastopol,CA
Mahopac,NY Elliot Greene,M.A.
Risa Flynn former president,American
Lori De Milto
Medical Writer Massage Therapy Association
Medical Writer
Culver City,CA Massage Therapist
Sicklerville,NJ
Silver Spring,MD
Paula Ford-Martin
Robert S. Dinsmoor
Medical Writer Peter Gregutt
Medical Writer
Chaplin,MN Writer
South Hamilton,MA
Asheville,NC
Janie F. Franz
Stephanie Dionne,B.S.
Writer Laith F. Gulli,M.D.
Medical Writer
Grand Forks,ND M.Sc.,M.Sc.(MedSci),M.S.A.,
Ann Arbor,MI
Msc.Psych,MRSNZ
Martin W. Dodge,Ph.D. Sallie Freeman,Ph.D.,B.S.N. FRSH,FRIPHH,FAIC,FZS
Technical Writer/Editor Medical Writer DAPA,DABFC,DABCI
Atlanta,GA
Centinela Hospital and Medical Consultant Psychotherapist in
Center Private Practice
Rebecca J. Frey,Ph.D.
Inglewood,CA Lathrup Village,MI
Research and Administrative
David Doermann Associate Kapil Gupta,M.D.
Medical Writer East Rock Institute Medical Writer
Salt Lake City,UT New Haven,CT Winston-Salem,NC
Stefanie B. N. Dugan,M.S. Cynthia L. Frozena,R.N. Maureen Haggerty
Genetic Counselor Nurse,Medical Writer Medical Writer
Milwaukee,WI Manitowoc,WI Ambler,PA
Doug Dupler,M.A. Ron Gasbarro,Pharm.D. Clare Hanrahan
Science Writer Medical Writer Medical Writer
Boulder,CO New Milford,PA Asheville,NC
XIV GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
srotubirtnoC
Ann M. Haren West Chester,PA John T. Lohr,Ph.D.
Science Writer Assistant Director,Biotechnology
Beth A. Kapes
Madison,CT Center
Medical Writer
Utah State University
Judy C. Hawkins,M.S. Bay Village,OH
Logan,UT
Genetic Counselor
Christine Kuehn Kelly
The University of Texas Medical Larry Lutwick,M.D.,F.A.C.P.
Medical Writer
Branch Director,Infectious Diseases
Havertown,PA
Galveston,TX VA Medical Center
Bob Kirsch Brooklyn,NY
Caroline Helwick
Medical Writer
Medical Writer
Ossining,NY Suzanne M. Lutwick
New Orleans,LA
Medical Writer
Joseph Knight,P.A.
David Helwig Brooklyn,NY
Medical Writer
Medical Writer
Winton,CA Nicole Mallory,M.S.
London,Ontario
Medical Student
Melissa Knopper
Lisette Hilton Wayne State University
Medical Writer
Medical Writer Detroit,MI
Chicago,IL
Boca Raton,FL
Karen Krajewski,M.S.,C.G.C. Warren Maltzman,Ph.D.
Katherine S. Hunt,M.S. Genetic Counselor Consultant,Molecular Pathology
Genetic Counselor Assistant Professor of Neurology Demarest,NJ
University of New Mexico Health
Wayne State University
Sciences Center Adrienne Massel,R.N.
Detroit,MI
Albuquerque,NM Medical Writer
Jeanne Krob,M.D.,F.A.C.S. Beloit,WI
Kevin Hwang,M.D.
Physician,writer
Medical Writer Ruth E. Mawyer,R.N.
Pittsburgh,PA
Morristown,NJ Medical Writer
Jennifer Lamb Charlottesville,VA
Holly Ann Ishmael,M.S.,C.G.C.
Medical Writer
Genetic Counselor Richard A. McCartney M.D.
Spokane,WA
The Children’s Mercy Hospital Fellow,American College of
Kansas City,MO Richard H. Lampert Surgeons
Dawn A. Jacob,M.S. Senior Medical Editor Diplomat American Board of
Genetic Counselor W.B. Saunders Co. Surgery
Obstetrix Medical Group of Texas Philadelphia,PA Richland,WA
Fort Worth,TX
Jeffrey P. Larson,R.P.T. Bonny McClain,Ph.D.
Sally J. Jacobs,Ed.D. Physical Therapist Medical Writer
Medical Writer Sabin,MN Greensboro,NC
Los Angeles,CA
Jill Lasker Sally C. McFarlane-Parrott
Michelle L. Johnson,M.S.,J.D.
Medical Writer Medical Writer
Patent Attorney and Medical Writer
Midlothian,VA Ann Arbor,MI
Portland,OR
Kristy Layman Mercedes McLaughlin
Paul A. Johnson,Ed.M.
Music Therapist Medical Writer
Medical Writer
East Lansing,MI Phoenixville,CA
San Diego,CA
Cindy L. A. Jones,Ph.D. Victor Leipzig,Ph.D. Alison McTavish,M.Sc.
Biomedical Writer Biological Consultant Medical Writer and Editor
Sagescript Communications Huntington Beach,CA Montreal,Quebec
Lakewood,CO
Lorraine Lica,Ph.D. Liz Meszaros
David Kaminstein,M.D. Medical Writer Medical Writer
Medical Writer San Diego,CA Lakewood,OH
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 XV
Contributors
Betty Mishkin J. Ricker Polsdorfer,M.D. Belinda Rowland,Ph.D.
Medical Writer Medical Writer Medical Writer
Skokie,IL Phoenix,AZ Voorheesville,NY
Barbara J. Mitchell Scott Polzin,M.S.,C.G.C. Andrea Ruskin,M.D.
Medical Writer Medical Writer Whittingham Cancer Center
Hallstead,PA Buffalo Grove,IL Norwalk,CT
Mark A. Mitchell,M.D. Elizabeth J. Pulcini,M.S. Laura Ruth,Ph.D.
Medical Writer Medical Writer Medical,Science,& Technology
Seattle,WA Phoenix,Arizona Writer
Los Angeles,CA
Susan J. Montgomery Nada Quercia,M.S.,C.C.G.C.
Medical Writer Genetic Counselor Karen Sandrick
Milwaukee,WI Division of Clinical and Metabolic Medical Writer
Chicago,IL
Genetics
Louann W. Murray,PhD
The Hospital for Sick Children
Medical Writer Kausalya Santhanam,Ph.D.
Toronto,ON,Canada
Huntington Beach,CA Technical Writer
Branford,CT
Ann Quigley
Bilal Nasser,M.Sc.
Medical Writer
Senior Medical Student Jason S. Schliesser,D.C.
New York,NY
Universidad Iberoamericana Chiropractor
Santo Domingo,Domincan Holland Chiropractic,Inc.
Robert Ramirez,B.S.
Republic Holland,OH
Medical Student
Laura Ninger University of Medicine & Dentistry Joan Schonbeck
Medical Writer of New Jersey Medical Writer
Weehawken,NJ Stratford,NJ Nursing
Massachusetts Department of
Kulbir Rangi,D.O.
Nancy J. Nordenson Mental Health
Medical Doctor and Writer
Medical Writer Marlborough,MA
New York,NY
Minneapolis,MN
Laurie Heron Seaver,M.D.
Esther Csapo Rastegari,Ed.M.,
Teresa Norris,R.N. Clinical Geneticist
Medical Writer R.N./B.S.N. Greenwood Genetic Center
Registered Nurse,Medical Writer
Ute Park,NM Greenwood,SC
Holbrook,MA
Lisa Papp,R.N. Catherine Seeley
Medical Writer Toni Rizzo Medical Writer
Cherry Hill,NJ Medical Writer
Salt Lake City,UT Kristen Mahoney Shannon,M.S.,
Patience Paradox C.G.C.
Medical Writer Martha Robbins Genetic Counselor
Bainbridge Island,WA Medical Writer Center for Cancer Risk Analysis
Evanston,IL Massachusetts General Hospital
Barbara J. Pettersen
Boston,MA
Genetic Counselor Richard Robinson
Genetic Counseling of Central Medical Writer Kim A. Sharp,M.Ln.
Oregon Tucson,AZ Writer
Bend,OR Richmond,TX
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
Genevieve Pham-Kanter,M.S. Science Writer Judith Sims,M.S.
Medical Writer Belleville,MI Medical Writer
Chicago,IL Logan,UT
Anna Rovid Spickler,D.V.M.,
Collette Placek Ph.D. Joyce S. Siok,R.N.
Medical Writer Medical Writer Medical Writer
Wheaton,IL Moorehead,KY South Windsor,CT
XVI GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
srotubirtnoC
Jennifer Sisk Liz Swain Amy Vance,M.S.,C.G.C.
Medical Writer Medical Writer Genetic Counselor
Havertown,PA San Diego,CA GeneSage,Inc.
San Francisco,CA
Patricia Skinner Deanna M. Swartout-Corbeil,
Medical Writer R.N. Michael Sherwin Walston
Amman,Jordan Medical Writer Student Researcher
Thompsons Station,TN University of Arizona
Genevieve Slomski,Ph.D.
Tucson,AZ
Medical Writer Keith Tatarelli,J.D.
New Britain,CT Medical Writer
Ronald Watson,Ph.D.
Mary Jane Tenerelli,M.S.
Stephanie Slon Science Writer
Medical Writer
Medical Writer Tucson,AZ
East Northport,NY
Portland,OR
Ellen S. Weber,M.S.N.
Catherine L. Tesla,M.S.,C.G.C.
Linda Wasmer Smith Medical Writer
Senior Associate,Faculty
Medical Writer Fort Wayne,IN
Dept. of Pediatrics,Division of
Albuquerque,NM
Medical Genetics
Ken R. Wells
Java O. Solis,M.S. Emory University School of
Freelance Writer
Medical Writer Medicine
Laguna Hills,CA
Decatur,GA Atlanta,GA
Jennifer F. Wilson,M.S.
Elaine Souder,PhD Bethany Thivierge
Science Writer
Medical Writer Biotechnical Writer/Editor
Haddonfield,NJ
Little Rock,AR Technicality Resources
Rockland,ME
Jane E. Spehar Kathleen D. Wright,R.N.
Medical Writer Mai Tran,Pharm.D. Medical Writer
Canton,OH Medical Writer Delmar,DE
Troy,MI
Lorraine Steefel,R.N. Jennifer Wurges
Medical Writer Carol Turkington Medical Writer
Morganville,NJ Medical Writer Rochester Hills,MI
Lancaster,PA
Kurt Sternlof
Mary Zoll,Ph.D.
Science Writer Judith Turner,B.S.
Science Writer
New Rochelle,NY Medical Writer
Newton Center,MA
Sandy,UT
Roger E. Stevenson,M.D.
Director Amy B. Tuteur,M.D. Jon Zonderman
Medical Writer
Greenwood Genetic Center Medical Advisor
Orange,CA
Greenwood,SC Sharon,MA
Dorothy Stonely Samuel Uretsky,Pharm.D. Michael V. Zuck,Ph.D.
Medical Writer Medical Writer Medical Writer
Los Gatos,CA Wantagh,NY Boulder,CO
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 XVII
Contributors
C
CABG surgery see Coronary artery bypass Timed-release forms should not be taken less than six
hours before bedtime.
graft surgery
CAD see Coronary artery disease
Children under 12 years
Not recommended.
Other considerations
Caffeine
Avoid taking too much caffeine when it is being
taken as an over-the-counter drug. Consider how much
Definition
caffeine is being taken in from coffee,tea,chocolate,soft
Caffeine is a drug that stimulates the central nervous drinks,and other foods that contain caffeine. Check with
system. a pharmacist or physician to find out how much caffeine
is safe to use.
Purpose
Caffeine makes people more alert,less drowsy,and Precautions
improves coordination. Combined with certain pain Caffeine cannot replace sleep and should not be used
relievers or medicines for treating migraine headache, regularly to stay awake as the drug can lead to more seri-
caffeine makes those drugs work more quickly and effec- ous sleep disorders,like insomnia.
tively. Caffeine alone can also help relieve headaches.
People who use large amounts of caffeine over long
Antihistaminesare sometimes combined with caffeine
periods build up a tolerance to it. When that happens,
to counteract the drowsiness that those drugs cause. Caf-
they have to use more and more caffeine to get the same
feine is also sometimes used to treat other conditions,
effects. Heavy caffeine use can also lead to dependence.
including breathing problems in newborns and in young
If the person then stops using caffeine abruptly, with-
babies after surgery.
drawal symptoms may occur. These can include throb-
bing headaches,fatigue,drowsiness,yawning,irritabili-
Description
ty, restlessness, vomiting, or runny nose. These symp-
Caffeine is found naturally in coffee,tea,and chocolate. toms can go on for as long as a week if caffeine is avoid-
Colas and some other soft drinks contain it. Caffeine also ed. Then the symptoms usually disappear.
comes in tablet and capsule forms and can be bought without
If taken too close to bedtime,caffeine can interfere
a prescription. Over-the-counter caffeine brands include No
with sleep. Even if it does not prevent a person from
Doz, Overtime, Pep-Back, Quick-Pep, Caffedrine, and
falling asleep,it may disturb sleep during the night.
Vivarin. Some pain relievers, medicines for migraine
The notion that caffeine helps people sober up after
headaches,and antihistamines also contain caffeine.
drinking too much alcohol is a myth. In fact,using caf-
feine and alcohol together is not a good idea. The combi-
Recommended dosage
nation can lead to an upset stomach,nausea,and vomiting.
Adults and children age 12 years and over
Older people may be more sensitive to caffeine and
100–200 mg no more than every 3–4 hours. In thus more likely to have certain side effects,such as irri-
timed-release form,the dose is 200–250 mg once a day. tability,nervousness,anxiety,and sleep problems.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 625
•heart disease or recent heart attack (within a few
KEY TERMS weeks)
•high blood pressure
Arrhythmia—Abnormal heart rhythm.
•liver disease
Central nervous system—The brain, spinal cord
•insomnia (trouble sleeping)
and nerves throughout the body.
•anxiety or panic attacks
Fetus—A developing baby inside the womb.
•agoraphobia (fear of being in open places)
Palpitation—Rapid, forceful, throbbing, or flutter-
ing heartbeat. •premenstrual syndrome (PMS)
Withdrawal symptoms—A group of physical or USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Using caffeine with
mental symptoms that may occur when a person certain other drugs may interfere with the effects of the
suddenly stops using a drug to which he or she has drugs or cause unwanted—and possibly serious—side
become dependent. effects.
Side effects
At recommended doses,caffeine can cause restless-
Special conditions
ness,irritability,nervousness,shakiness,headache,light-
Caffeine may cause problems for people with certain headedness, sleeplessness, nausea, vomiting, and upset
medical conditions or who are taking certain medicines. stomach. At higher than recommended doses,caffeine can
cause excitement,agitation,anxiety,confusion,a sensa-
ALLERGIES. Anyone with allergies to foods, dyes,
tion of light flashing before the eyes,unusual sensitivity to
preservatives, or to the compounds aminophylline,
touch,unusual sensitivity of other senses,ringing in the
dyphylline,oxtriphylline,theobromine,or theophylline
ears,frequent urination,muscle twitches or tremors,heart
should check with a physician before using caffeine.
arrhythmias,rapid heartbeat,flushing,and convulsions.
Anyone who has ever had an unusual reaction to caffeine
should also check with a physician before using it again.
Interactions
PREGNANCY. Caffeine can pass from a pregnant
woman’s body into the developing fetus. Although there Certain drugs interfere with the breakdown of caf-
is no evidence that caffeine causes birth defectsin peo- feine in the body. These include oral contraceptivesthat
ple,it does cause such effects in laboratory animals given contain estrogen, the antiarrhythmia drug mexiletine
very large doses (equal to human doses of 12–24 cups of (Mexitil),the ulcer drug cimetidine (Tagamet),and the
coffee a day). In humans,evidence exists that doses of drug disulfiram (Antabuse),used to treat alcoholism.
more than 300 mg of caffeine a day (about the amount of Caffeine interferes with drugs that regulate heart
caffeine in 2–3 cups of coffee) may cause miscarriageor rhythm,such as quinidine and propranolol (Inderal). Caf-
problems with the baby’s heart rhythm. Women who take feine may also interfere with the body’s absorption of iron.
more than 300 mg of caffeine a day during pregnancy Anyone who takes iron supplements should take them at
are also more likely to have babies with low birth least an hour before or two hours after using caffeine.
weights. Any woman who is pregnant or planning to
Serious side effects are possible when caffeine is
become pregnant should check with her physician before
combined with certain drugs. For example,taking caf-
using caffeine.
feine with the decongestant phenylpropanolamine can
BREASTFEEDING. Caffeine passes into breast milk raise blood pressure. And very serious heart problems
and can affect the nursing baby. Nursing babies whose may occur if caffeine and monoamine oxidase
mothers use 600 mg or more of caffeine a day may be inhibitors (MAO) are taken together. These drugs are
irritable and have trouble sleeping. Women who are used to treat Parkinson’s disease,depression,and other
breastfeeding should check with their physicians before psychiatric conditions. Consult with a pharmacist or
using caffeine. physician about which drugs can interact with caffeine.
Because caffeine stimulates the nervous system,
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Caffeine may cause
anyone taking other central nervous system (CNS) stim-
problems for people with these medical conditions:
ulants should be careful about using caffeine.
•peptic ulcer
•heart arrhythmiasor palpitations Nancy Ross-Flanigan
626 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
enieffaC
CAH see Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Anyone taking calcium channel blockers for high
blood pressure should not take any other prescription or
Caisson disease see Decompression
over-the-counter medication without first checking with
sickness the prescribing physician, as some of these drugs may
increase blood pressure.
Calcaneal spurs see Heel spurs
Some people feel drowsy or less alert than usual
Calcitonin see Bone disorder drugs
when taking calcium channel blockers. Anyone who
Calcium carbonate see Antacids takes these drugs should not drive,use machines,or do
anything else that might be dangerous until they have
found out how the drugs affect them.
People who normally have chest pain when they
exerciseor exert themselves may not have the pain when
Calcium channel blockers they are taking calcium channel blockers. This could lead
them to be more active than they should be. Anyone tak-
Definition ing calcium channel blockers should therefore consult
with the prescribing physician concerning how much
Calcium channel blockers are medicines that slow
exercise and activity may be considered safe.
the movement of calcium into the cells of the heart and
blood vessels. This, in turn, relaxes blood vessels, Some people get headaches that last for a short time
increases the supply of oxygen-rich blood to the heart, after taking a dose of this medication. This problem usu-
and reduces the heart’s workload. ally goes away during the course of treatment. If it does
not,or if the headaches are severe,the prescribing physi-
cian should be informed.
Purpose
Patients taking certain calcium channel blockers
Calcium channel blockers are used to treat high
may need to check their pulse regularly,as the drugs may
blood pressure,to correct abnormal heart rhythms,and to
slow the pulse too much. If the pulse is too slow,circula-
relieve the type of chest pain called angina pectoris.
tion problems may result. The prescribing physician can
Physicians also prescribe calcium channel blockers to
show patients the correct way to check their pulse.
treat panic attacks and bipolar disorder(manic depres-
sive illness) and to prevent migraine headache. This type of medication may cause the gums to
swell,bleed,or become tender. If this problem occurs,a
medical physician or dentist should be consulted. To help
Precautions
prevent the problem,care should be taken when brushing
Seeing a physician regularly while taking calcium and flossing the teeth. Regular dental check-ups and
channel blockers is important. The physician will check cleanings are also recommended.
to make certain the medicine is working as it should and
Older people may be unusually sensitive to the
will watch for unwanted side effects. People who have
effects of calcium channel blockers. This may increase
high blood pressure often feel perfectly fine. However,
the chance of side effects.
they should continue to see their prescribing physician
even when they feel well so that he can keep a close
Special conditions
watch on their condition. They should also continue to
take their medicine even when they feel fine. People with certain medical conditions or who are
Calcium channel blockers will not cure high blood taking certain other medicines may develop problems if
pressure,but will help to control the condition. To avoid they also take calcium channel blockers. Before taking
the serious health problems associated with high blood these drugs, the prescribing physician should be
pressure,patients may have to take this type of medica- informed about any of these conditions:
tion for the rest of their lives. Furthermore,the blockers
ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had a previous unusual
alone may not be enough. People with high blood pres-
reaction to any calcium channel blocker should let his or
sure may also need to avoid certain foods and keep their
her physician know before taking the drugs again. The
weight under control. The health care professional who
physician should also be notified about any allergiesto
is treating the condition can offer advice as to what mea-
foods,dyes,preservatives,or other substances.
sures may be necessary. Patients being treated for high
blood pressure should not change their diets without PREGNANCY. The effects of taking calcium channel
consulting their physicians. blockers during pregnancy have not been studied in
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 627
Calcium
channel
blockers
ly go away as the body adjusts to the drug and do not
KEY TERMS require medical treatment unless they persist or they are
bothersome.
Angina pectoris—A feeling of tightness, heavi- If any of the following side effects occur, the pre-
ness, or pain in the chest, caused by a lack of oxy- scribing physician should be notified as soon as possible:
gen in the muscular wall of the heart.
•breathing problems,coughing or wheezing
Bipolar disorder—A severe mental illness, also
•irregular,fast,or pounding heartbeat
known as manic depression, in which a person
•slow heartbeat (less than 50 beats per minute)
has extreme mood swings, ranging from a highly
excited state—sometimes with a false sense of •skin rash
well-being—to depression. •swollen ankles,feet,or lower legs
Migraine—A throbbing headache that usually Other side effects may occur. Anyone who has
affects only one side of the head. Nausea, vomit- unusual symptoms after taking calcium blockers should
ing, increased sensitivity to light, and other symp- contact the prescribing physician.
toms often accompany migraine.
Interactions
Calcium channel blockers may interact with a num-
ber of other medications. When this happens,the effects
humans. However,in studies of laboratory animals,large
of one or both of the drugs may change or the risk of side
doses of these drugs have been reported to cause birth effects may increase. Anyone who takes calcium channel
defects,stillbirth,poor bone growth,and other problems
blockers should not take any other prescription or non-
when taken during pregnancy. Women who are pregnant
prescription (over-the-counter) medicines without first
or who may become pregnant should check with their
checking with the prescribing physician. Substances that
physicians before using these drugs.
may interact with calcium channel blockers include:
BREASTFEEDING. Some calcium channel blockers •Diuretics (water pills). This type of medicine may
pass into breast milk,but there have been no reports of cause low levels of potassium in the body,which may
problems in nursing babies whose mothers were taking increase the chance of unwanted effects from some cal-
this type of medication. However,women who need to cium channel blockers.
take this medicine and want to breastfeed their babies
•Beta-blockers, such as atenolol (Tenormin), propra-
should check with their physicians.
nolol (Inderal), and metoprolol (Lopressor), used to
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Calcium channel treat high blood pressure,angina,and other conditions.
blockers may worsen heart or blood vessel disorders. Also,eye drop forms of beta blockers,such as timolol
(Timoptic),used to treat glaucoma. Taking any of these
The effects of calcium channel blockers may be
drugs with calcium channel blockers may increase the
greater in people with kidney or liver disease, as their
effects of both types of medicine and may cause prob-
bodies are slower to clear the drug from their systems.
lems if either drug is stopped suddenly.
Certain calcium channel blockers may also cause
•Digitalis heart medicines. Taking these medicines with
problems in people with a history of heart rhythm prob-
calcium channel blockers may increase the action of the
lems or with depression,Parkinson’s disease,or other
heart medication.
types of parkinsonism.
•Medicines used to correct irregular heart rhythms,such as
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking calcium chan- quinidine (Quinidex),disopyramide (Norpace),and pro-
nel blockers with certain other drugs may affect the way cainamide (Procan,Pronestyl). The effects of these drugs
the drugs work or may increase the chance of side effects. may increase if used with calcium channel blockers.
As with most medications, certain side effects are •Anti-seizure medications such as carbamazepine (Tegre-
possible and some interactions with other substances tol). Calcium channel drugs may increase the effects of
may occur. these medicines.
•Cyclosporine (Sandimmune),a medicine that suppress-
Side effects
es the immune system. Effects may increase if this drug
Side effects are not common with this medicine,but is taken with calcium channel blockers.
some may occur. Minor discomforts,such as dizziness, •Grapefruit juice may increase the effects of some calci-
lightheadedness,flushing,headache,and nausea,usual- um channel blockers.
628 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
srekcolb
lennahc
muiclaC
The above list does not include every drug that may Resources
interact with calcium channel blockers. The prescribing
BOOKS
physician or pharmacist will advise as to whether com-
Beers,Mark H. and Robert Berkow,eds. The Merck Manual of
bining calcium channel blockers with any other prescrip-
Diagnosis and Therapy. 17th ed. Whitehouse Station,NJ:
tion or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medication is
Merck and Company,Inc.,1999.
appropriate or not.
PERIODICALS
Zoler,Mitchel L.“Drug Update:Calcium Channel Blockers For
Description Hypertension.”Family Practice News(April 1,2000):53.
“The Pressure’s On:A Hypertension Drug Taken by 28 Million
Calcium channel blockers are available only with a
People is Under Scrutiny. What Are the Other Options?
physician’s prescription and are sold in tablet,capsule,
(Calcium Channel Blockers).”Time(September 11,
and injectable forms. Some commonly used calcium
2000):126.
channel blockers include amlopidine (Norvasc), dilti-
azem (Cardizem), isradipine (DynaCirc), nifedipine ORGANIZATION
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. <http://www.nhlbi.
(Adalat, Procardia), nicardipine (Cardene), and vera-
nih.gov>.
pamil (Calan,Isoptin,Verelan).
The recommended dosage depends on the type, Deanna M. Swartout-Corbeil,R.N.
strength, and form of calcium channel blocker and the
condition for which it is prescribed. Correct dosage is Calcium imbalance see Hypercalcemia;
determined by the prescribing physician and further
Hypocalcemia
information can be obtained from the pharmacist.
Calcium polycarbophil see Laxatives
Calcium channel blockers should be taken as direct-
ed. Larger or more frequent doses should not be taken, California flower essences see Flower
nor should doses be missed. This medicine may take sev- remedies
eral weeks to noticeably lower blood pressure. The
Calluses see Corns and calluses
patient taking calcium channel blockers should keep tak-
ing the medicine,to give it time to work. Once it begins Calorie-modified diet see Diets
to work and symptoms improve,it should continue to be
Calymmatobacteriosis see Granuloma
taken as prescribed.
inguinale
This medicine should not be discontinued without
checking with the prescribing physician. Some condi- Campylobacter jejuni infection see
tions may worsen when patients stop taking calcium Campylobacteriosis
channel blockers abruptly. The prescribing physician will
advise as to how to gradually taper down before stopping
the medication completely.
Risks
Campylobacteriosis
A report from the European Cardiology Society in
Definition
2000 found that patients taking certain calcium chan-
nel blockers had a 27% greater risk of heart attack, Campylobacteriosis refers to infection by the group
and a 26% greater risk of heart failure than patients of bacteria known as Campylobacter. The term comes
taking other high blood pressure medicines. However, from the Greek word meaning “curved rod”referring to
there are many patients affected by conditions that still the bacteria’s curved shape. The most common disease
make calcium channel blockers the best choice for caused by these organisms is diarrhea,which most often
them. The patient should discuss this issue with the affects children and younger adults. Campylobacter
prescribing physician. infections account for a substantial percent of food-borne
illness encountered each year.
Normal results
Description
The expected result of taking a calcium channel
blocker is to either correct abnormal heart rhythms, There are over 15 different subtypes,all of which are
return blood pressure to normal,or relieve chest pain. curved Gram-negative rods. C. jeuniis the subtype that
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 629
Campylobacteriosis
KEY TERMS
Antibiotic—A medication that is designed to kill or stain turn purple, while Gram-negative bacteria
weaken bacteria. which do not take up the stain turn red.
Guillain-Barré syndrome—Progressive and usually
Anti-motility medications—Medications such as
reversible paralysis or weakness of multiple muscles
loperamide (Imodium), dephenoxylate (Lomotil), or
usually starting in the lower extremities and often
medications containing codeine or narcotics which
ascending to the muscles involved in respiration.
decrease the ability of the intestine to contract. This
The syndrome is due to inflammation and loss of
can worsen the condition of a patient with dysen-
the myelin covering of the nerve fibers, often asso-
tery or colitis.
ciated with an acute infection.
Fluoroquinolones—A relatively new group of anti-
Meninges—Outer covering of the spinal cord and
biotics that have had good success in treating infec-
brain. Infection is called meningitis, which can lead
tions with many Gram-negative bacteria. One
to damage to the brain or spinal cord and even
drawback is that they should not be used in child-
death.
ren under 17 years of age, because of possible
effect on bone growth. Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS)—A liquid prepa-
ration developed by the World Health Organization
Food-borne illness—A disease that is transmitted by that can decrease fluid loss in persons with diar-
eating or handling contaminated food. rhea. Originally developed to be prepared with
materials available in the home, commercial prepa-
Gram-negative—Refers to the property of many
rations have recently come into use.
bacteria that causes them to not take up color with
Gram’s stain, a method which is used to identify Stool—Passage of fecal material; a bowel move-
bacteria. Gram-positive bacteria which take up the ment.
most often causes gastrointestinal disease. However,some sists longer in about 20% of cases. At least 10% will have
species such as C. fetusproduce disease outside the intes- a relapse, and some patients will continue to pass the
tine,particularly in those with altered immune systems, bacteria for several weeks.
such as people with AIDS,cancer,and liver disease.
Campylobacter are often found in the intestine of Complications
animals raised for food produce and pets. Infected ani-
Dehydration is the most common complication.
mals often have no symptoms. Chickens are the most
Especially at the extremes of age,this should be watched
common source of human infection. It is estimated that
for and treated with either Oral Rehydration Solution or
1% of the general population is infected each year.
intravenous fluid replacement.
Infection may also involve areas outside the intes-
Causes and symptoms tine. This is unusual,except for infections with C. fetus.
C. fetusinfections tend to occur in those who have dis-
Improper or incomplete food preparation is the most
eases of decreased immunity such as AIDS,cancer,etc.
common way the disease is spread,with poultry account-
This subtype is particularly adapted to protect itself from
ing for over half the cases. Untreated water and raw milk
the body’s defenses.
are also potential sources.
Areas outside the intestine that may be involved are:
The incubation period after exposure is from one to
10 days. A day or two of mild fever,muscle aches,and •Nervous system involvement either by direct infection
headacheoccur before intestinal symptoms begin. Diar- of the meninges (outer covering of the spinal and brain)
rhea with or without blood and severe abdominal cramps or more commonly by producing the Guillain-Barré
are the major intestinal symptoms. The severity of symp- syndrome (progressive and reversible paralysis or
toms is variable,ranging from only mild fever to dehy- weakness of many muscles). In fact, Campylobacter
drationand rarely death(mainly in the very young or may be responsible for 40% of the reported cases of
old). The disease usually lasts about one week,but per- this syndrome.
630 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisoiretcabolypmaC
•Joint inflammation can occur weeks later (leading to an Wolfe,Martin S. “Acute Infectious Diarrhea.”In Conn’s Cur-
unusual form of arthritis). rent Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia:W.
B. Saunders Co.,1996.
•Infection of vessels and heart valves is a special charac-
teristic of C. fetus. Immunocompromised patients may PERIODICALS
develop repeated episodes of passage of bacteria into Lew,Edward A.,Michael A. Poles,and Douglas T. Dieterich.
the bloodstream from these sites of infection. “Diarrheal Disease Associated with HIV Infection.”Gas-
troenterology Clinics of North America(June 1997):259-
•The gallbladder,pancreas,and bone may be affected.
290.
“Traveler’s Diarrhea:Don’t Let It Ruin Your Trip.”Mayo Clin-
Diagnosis ic Health Letter(Jan. 1997).
“When Microbes are on the Menu.”Harvard Health Letter
Campylobacteris only one of many causes of acute (Dec. 1994) :4-5.
diarrhea. Culture (growing the bacteria in the laboratory)
ORGANIZATIONS
of freshly obtained diarrhea fluid is the only way to be
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd.,
certain of the diagnosis.
NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435,(404) 639-3311.
<http://www.cdc.gov>.
Treatment
OTHER
The first aim of treatment is to keep up nutrition Centers for Disease Control.<http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/
and avoid dehydration. Medications used to treat diar- ddt/ddthome.htm>.
rhea by decreasing intestinal motility, such as Lop-
David Kaminstein,MD
eramide or Diphenoxylate are also useful, but should
only be used with the advice of a physician. Antibiotics
are of value, if started within three days of onset of
symptoms. They are indicated for those with severe or
persistent symptoms. Either an erythromycin type drug
or one of the fluoroquinolones(such as ciprofloxacin) Cancer
for five to seven days are the accepted therapies.
Definition
Prognosis Cancer is not just one disease,but a large group of
almost one hundred diseases. Its two main characteristics
Most patients with Campylobacterinfection rapidly
are uncontrolled growth of the cells in the human body
recover without treatment. For certain groups of patients,
and the ability of these cells to migrate from the original
infection becomes chronic and requires repeated courses
site and spread to distant sites. If the spread is not con-
of antibiotics.
trolled,cancer can result in death.
Prevention
Description
Good hand washing technique as well as proper
One out of every four deaths in the United States is
preparation and cooking of food is the best way to pre-
from cancer. It is second only to heart disease as a cause
vent infection.
of death in the states. About 1.2 million Americans are
diagnosed with cancer annually; more than 500,000 die
Resources of cancer annually.
BOOKS Cancer can attack anyone. Since the occurrence of
Blaser,Martin J. “Infections due to Campylobacter and Related cancer increases as individuals age,most of the cases are
Species.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, seen in adults,middle-aged or older. Sixty percent of all
ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill, cancers are diagnosed in people who are older than 65
1997.
years of age. The most common cancers are skin cancer,
Hamer,Davidson H.,and Sherwood L. Gorbach. “Campy-
lung cancer,colon cancer,breast cancer(in women),
lobacter.”In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and
and prostate cancer(in men). In addition,cancer of the
Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W.
kidneys,ovaries,uterus,pancreas,bladder,rectum,and
B. Saunders Co.,1997.
blood and lymph node cancer (leukemias and lym-
Thielman,Nathan M.,and Richard L. Guerrant. “Food-Borne
Illness.”In Conn’s Current Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E. phomas) are also included among the 12 major cancers
Rakel. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996. that affect most Americans.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 631
Cancer
Cancer, by definition, is a disease of the genes. A subdivided into two types:adenocarcinomas and squa-
gene is a small part of DNA,which is the master mole- mous cell carcinomas. Adenocarcinomas are cancers that
cule of the cell. Genes make “proteins,” which are the develop in an organ or a gland,while squamous cell car-
ultimate workhorses of the cells. It is these proteins that cinomas refer to cancers that originate in the skin.
allow our bodies to carry out all the many processes that
•Melanomas also originate in the skin, usually in the
permit us to breathe,think,move,etc.
pigment cells (melanocytes).
Throughout people’s lives,the cells in their bodies •Sarcomas are cancers of the supporting tissues of the
are growing,dividing,and replacing themselves. Many body,such as bone,muscle and blood vessels.
genes produce proteins that are involved in controlling
•Cancers of the blood and lymph glands are called
the processes of cell growth and division. An alteration
leukemias and lymphomas respectively.
(mutation) to the DNA molecule can disrupt the genes
and produce faulty proteins. This causes the cell to •Gliomas are cancers of the nerve tissue.
become abnormal and lose its restraints on growth. The
abnormal cell begins to divide uncontrollably and even- Causes and symptoms
tually forms a new growth known as a “tumor”or neo-
The major risk factors for cancer are:tobacco,alco-
plasm (medical term for cancer meaning “new growth”).
hol, diet, sexual and reproductive behavior, infectious
In a healthy individual,the immune system can rec- agents,family history,occupation,environment and pol-
ognize the neoplastic cells and destroy them before they lution.
get a chance to divide. However,some mutant cells may
According to the estimates of the American Cancer
escape immune detection and survive to become tumors
Society (ACS),approximately 40% of the cancer deaths
or cancers.
in 1998 will be due to tobacco and excessive alcohol use.
Tumors are of two types, benign or malignant. A An additional one-third of the deaths will be related to
benign tumor is not considered cancer. It is slow growing, diet and nutrition. Many of the one million skin cancers
does not spread or invade surrounding tissue,and once it that are expected to be diagnosed in 1998 will be due to
is removed,it doesn’t usually recur. A malignant tumor, over-exposure to ultraviolet light from the sun’s rays.
on the other hand,is cancer. It invades surrounding tissue
and spreads to other parts of the body. If the cancer cells Tobacco
have spread to the surrounding tissues,then,even after
Eighty to ninety percent of the lung cancer cases
the malignant tumor is removed,it generally recurs.
occur in smokers. Smokinghas also been shown to be a
A majority of cancers are caused by changes in the contributory factor in cancers of upper respiratory tract,
cell’s DNA because of damage due to the environment. esophagus,larynx,bladder,pancreas,and probably liver,
Environmental factors that are responsible for causing stomach, and kidney as well. Recently, scientists have
the initial mutation in the DNA are called carcinogens, also shown that second-hand smoke (or passive smoking)
and there are many types. can increase one’s risk of developing cancer.
There are some cancers that have a genetic basis. In
Alcohol
other words,an individual could inherit faulty DNA from
his parents,which could predispose him to getting cancer. Excessive consumption of alcohol is a risk factor in
While there is scientific evidence that both factors (envi- certain cancers,such as liver cancer. Alcohol,in combi-
ronmental and genetic) play a role,less than 10% of all nation with tobacco,significantly increases the chances
cancers are purely hereditary. Cancers that are known to that an individual will develop mouth,pharynx,larynx
have a hereditary link are breast cancer, colon cancer, and esophageal cancers.
ovarian cancer,and uterine cancer. Besides genes,cer-
tain physiological traits could be inherited and could con- Diet
tribute to cancers. For example,inheriting fair skin makes
Thirty-five percent of all cancers are due to dietary
a person more likely to develop skin cancer,but only if
causes. Excessive intake of fat leading to obesity has
they also have prolonged exposure to intensive sunlight.
been associated with cancers of the breast,colon,rectum,
There are several different types of cancers: pancreas,prostate,gall bladder,ovaries and uterus.
•Carcinomas are cancers that arise in the epithelium (the
Sexual and reproductive behavior
layers of cells covering the body’s surface and lining the
internal organs and various glands). Ninety percent of The human papilloma virus,which is sexually trans-
human cancers fall into this category. Carcinomas can be mitted, has been shown to cause cancer of the cervix.
632 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnaC
Having too many sex partners and becoming sexually
active early has been shown to increase one’s chances of
contracting this disease. In addition, it has also been
shown that women who don’t have children or have chil-
dren late in life have an increased risk for both ovarian
and breast cancer.
Infectious agents
In the last 20 years,scientists have obtained evidence
to show that approximately 15% of the world’s cancer
deaths can be traced to viruses,bacteria,or parasites. The
most common cancer-causing pathogens and the cancers
associated with them are shown in table form.
Family history
Certain cancers like breast,colon,ovarian and uter-
Cancer is a progressive disease,and goes through sev-
ine cancer recur generation after generation in some fami-
eral stages. Each stage may produce a number of symp-
lies. A few cancers,such as the eye cancer“retinoblas-
toms. Some symptoms are produced early and may occur
toma,”a type of colon cancer,and a type of breast cancer
due to a tumor that is growing within an organ or a gland.
known as “early-onset breast cancer,”have been shown to
As the tumor grows,it may press on the nearby nerves,
be linked to certain genes that can be tracked within a
organs and blood vessels. This causes painand some pres-
family. It is therefore possible that inheriting particular
sure which may be the earliest warning signs of cancer.
genes makes a person susceptible to certain cancers.
Despite the fact that there are several hundred differ-
Occupational hazards ent types of cancers,producing very different symptoms,
the ACS has established the following seven symptoms
There is evidence to prove that certain occupational
as possible warning signals of cancer:
hazards account for 4% of all cancer deaths. For exam-
•changes in the size,color,or shape of a wart or a mole
ple, asbestos workers have an increased incidence of
lung cancer. Similarly, a higher likelihood of getting •a sore that does not heal
bladder canceris associated with dye,rubber and gas
•persistent cough,hoarseness,or sore throat
workers; skin and lung cancer with smelters,gold miners
and arsenic workers; leukemia with glue and varnish •a lump or thickening in the breast or elsewhere
workers; liver cancer with PVC manufacturers; and lung, •unusual bleeding or discharge
bone and bone marrow cancer with radiologists and ura-
•chronic indigestionor difficulty in swallowing
nium miners.
•any change in bowel or bladder habits
Environment Many other diseases,besides cancer,could produce
the same symptoms. However, it is important to have
Radiation is believed to cause 1–2% of all cancer
these symptoms checked,as soon as possible,especially
deaths. Ultra-violet radiation from the sun accounts for a
if they linger. The earlier a cancer is diagnosed and treat-
majority of melanoma deaths. Other sources of radiation
ed,the better the chance of it being cured. Many cancers
are x rays,radon gas,and ionizing radiation from nuclear
such as breast cancer may not have any early symptoms.
material.
Therefore,it is important to undergo routine screening
tests such as breast self-exams and mammograms.
Pollution
Several studies have shown that there is a well-
Diagnosis
established link between asbestos and cancer. Chlorina-
tion of water may account for a small rise in cancer risk. Diagnosis begins with a thorough physical examina-
However,the main danger from pollution occurs when tion and a complete medical history. The doctor will
dangerous chemicals from the industries escape into the observe,feel and palpate (apply pressure by touch) differ-
surrounding environment. It has been estimated that 1% ent parts of the body in order to identify any variations
of cancer deaths are due to air,land and water pollution. from the normal size,feel and texture of the organ or tissue.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 633
Cancer
Frequency Of Cancer-Related Death
Cancer Site Number of Deaths Per Year
Lung 160,100
Colon and rectum 56,500
Breast 43,900
Prostate 39,200
Pancreas 28,900
Lymphoma 26,300
Leukemia 21,600
Brain 17,400
Stomach 13,700
Liver 13,000
Esophagus 11,900
Bladder 12,500
Kidney 11,600
Multiple myeloma 11,300
As part of the physical exam,the doctor will inspect ence of these tumor markers. However,with a few excep-
the oral cavity or the mouth. By focusing a light into the tions,tumor markers are not used for routine screening
mouth,he will look for abnormalities in color,moisture, of cancers, because several non-cancerous conditions
surface texture,or presence of any thickening or sore in the also produce positive results. Blood tests are generally
lips,tongue,gums,the hard palate on the roof of the mouth, more useful in monitoring the effectiveness of the treat-
and the throat. To detect thyroid cancer,the doctor will ment, or in following the course of the disease and
observe the front of the neck for swelling. He may gently detecting recurrent disease.
manipulate the neck and palpate the front and side surfaces
Imaging tests such as computed tomography scans
of the thyroid gland (located at the base of the neck) to
(CT scans),magnetic resonance imaging(MRI),ultra-
detect any nodules or tenderness. As part of the physical
sound and fiberoptic scope examinations help the doctors
examination,the doctor will also palpate the lymph nodes
determine the location of the tumor even if it is deep
in the neck,under the arms and in the groin. Many illnesses
within the body. Conventional x rays are often used for
and cancers cause a swelling of the lymph nodes.
initial evaluation,because they are relatively cheap,pain-
The doctor may conduct a thorough examination of less and easily accessible. In order to increase the infor-
the skin to look for sores that have been present for more mation obtained from a conventional x ray,air or a dye
than three weeks and that bleed,ooze,or crust; irritated (such as barium or iodine) may be used as a contrast
patches that may itch or hurt,and any change in the size medium to outline or highlight parts of the body.
of a wart or a mole.
The most definitive diagnostic test is the biopsy,
Examination of the female pelvis is used to detect wherein a piece of tissue is surgically removed for micro-
cancers of the ovaries,uterus,cervix,and vagina. In the scope examination. Besides confirming a cancer, the
visual examination,the doctor looks for abnormal dis- biopsy also provides information about the type of can-
charges or the presence of sores. Then, using gloved cer, the stage it has reached, the aggressiveness of the
hands the physician palpates the internal pelvic organs cancer and the extent of its spread. Since a biopsy pro-
such as the uterus and ovaries to detect any abnormal vides the most accurate analysis,it is considered the gold
masses. Breast examination includes visual observation standard of diagnostic tests.
where the doctor looks for any discharge, unevenness,
Screening examinations conducted regularly by
discoloration, or scaling. The doctor palpates both
healthcare professionals can result in the detection of can-
breasts to feel for masses or lumps.
cers of the breast,colon,rectum,cervix,prostate,testis,
For males,inspection of the rectum and the prostate tongue,mouth,and skin at early stages,when treatment is
is also included in the physical examination. The doctor more likely to be successful. Some of the routine screen-
inserts a gloved finger into the rectum and rotates it slow- ing tests recommended by the ACS are sigmoidoscopy
ly to feel for any growths,tumors,or other abnormalities. (for colorectal cancer),mammography(for breast can-
The doctor also conducts an examination of the testes, cer),pap smear (for cervical cancer),and the PSA test
where the doctor observes the genital area and looks for (for prostate cancer). Self-examinations for cancers of the
swelling or other abnormalities. The testicles are palpat- breast,testes,mouth,and skin can also help in detecting
ed to identify any lumps,thickening or differences in the the tumors before the symptoms become serious.
size,weight and firmness.
A recent revolution in molecular biology and cancer
If the doctor detects an abnormality on physical exam- genetics has contributed a great deal to the development
ination, or the patient has some symptom that could be of several tests designed to assess one’s risk of getting
indicative of cancer,the doctor may order diagnostic tests. cancers. These new techniques include genetic testing,
where molecular probes are used to identify mutations in
Laboratory studies of sputum (sputum cytology),
certain genes that have been linked to particular cancers.
blood,urine,and stool can detect abnormalities that may
At present,however,there are a lot of limitations to genet-
indicate cancer. Sputum cytology is a test where the
ic testing and its utility appears ambiguous,emphasizing
phlegm that is coughed up from the lungs is microscopi-
the need to develop better strategies for early detection.
cally examined. It is often used to detect lung cancer. A
blood test for cancer is easy to perform,usually inexpen-
sive and risk-free. The blood sample is obtained by a lab
Treatment
technician or a doctor by inserting a needle into a vein
and is relatively painless. Blood tests can be either spe- The aim of cancer treatment is to remove all or as
cific or non-specific. Often times,in certain cancers,the much of the tumor as possible and to prevent the recur-
cancer cells release particular proteins (called tumor rence or spread of the primary tumor. While devising a
markers) and blood tests can be used to detect the pres- treatment plan for cancer, the likelihood of curing the
634 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnaC
cancer has to be weighed against the side effects of the •Diagnostic purposes. The most definitive tool for diag-
treatment. If the cancer is very aggressive and a cure is nosing cancer is a biopsy. Sometimes,a biopsy can be
not possible, then the treatment should be aimed at performed by inserting a needle through the skin. How-
relieving the symptoms and controlling the cancer for as ever,at other times,the only way to obtain some tissue
long as possible. sample for biopsy is by performing a surgical operation.
Cancer treatment can take many different forms,and •Cytoreductive surgery is a procedure where the doctor
it is always tailored to the individual patient. The deci- removes as much of the cancer as possible, and then
sion on which type of treatment is the most appropriate treats the remaining with radiation therapyor chemo-
depends on the type and location of cancer,the extent to therapy or both.
which it has already spread,the patient’s age,sex,gener-
•Palliative surgery is aimed at curing the symptoms,not
al health status and personal treatment preferences. The
the cancer. Usually,in such cases,the tumor is so large or
major types of treatment are:surgery,radiation,chemo-
has spread so much that removing the entire tumor is not
therapy,immunotherapy,hormone therapy,and bone-
an option. For example,a tumor in the abdomen may be
marrow transplantation.
so large that it may press on and block a portion of the
intestine,interfering with digestion and causing pain and
Surgery vomiting. “Debulking surgery”may remove a part of the
blockage and relieve the symptoms. In tumors that are
Surgery is the removal of a visible tumor and is the
dependent on hormones, removal of the organs that
most frequently used cancer treatment. It is most effec-
secrete the hormones is an option. For example, in
tive when a cancer is small and confined to one area of
prostate cancer,the release of testosterone by the testi-
the body.
cles stimulates the growth of cancerous cells. Hence,a
Surgery can be used for many purposes. man may undergo an “orchiectomy”(removal of testi-
cles) to slow the progress of the disease. Similarly,in a
•Treatment. Treatment of cancer by surgery involves
type of aggressive breast cancer,removal of the ovaries
removal of the tumor to cure the disease. This is typical-
(oophorectomy) will stop the synthesis of hormones
ly done when the cancer is localized to a discrete area.
from the ovaries and slow the progression of the cancer.
Along with the cancer, some part of the normal sur-
rounding tissue is also removed to ensure that no cancer
cells remain in the area. Since cancer usually spreads Radiation
via the lymphatic system,adjoining lymph nodes may
Radiation kills tumor cells. Radiation is used alone
be examined and sometimes they are removed as well.
in cases where a tumor is unsuitable for surgery. More
•Preventive surgery. Preventive or prophylactic surgery often, it is used in conjunction with surgery and
involves removal of an abnormal looking area that is chemotherapy. Radiation can be either external or inter-
likely to become malignant over time. For example, nal. In the external form,the radiation is aimed at the
40% of the people with a colon disease known as ulcer- tumor from outside the body. In internal radiation (also
ative colitis,ultimately die of colon cancer. Rather than known as brachytherapy),a radioactive substance in the
live with the fear of developing colon cancer,these peo- form of pellets or liquid is placed at the cancerous site
ple may choose to have their colons removed and by means of a pill,injection or insertion in a sealed con-
reduce the risk significantly. tainer.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 635
Cancer
Common Pathogens And The Cancers Associated With Them
Causative Angent Type of Cancer
Viruses
Papillomaviruses Cancer of the cervix
Hepatitis B virus Liver cancer
Hepatitis C virus Liver cancer
Epstein-Barr virus Burkitt’s lymphoma
Cancers of the upper pharynx Hodgkin’s lymphoma, Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, Gastric cancers
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Kaposi’s sarcoma lymphoma
Bacteria
Helicobacter pylori Stomach cancer lymphomas
Chemotherapy and is essential to life. Sometimes,the amount of drugs
or radiation needed to destroy cancer cells also destroys
Chemotherapy is the use of drugs to kill cancer cells.
bone marrow. Replacing the bone marrow with healthy
It destroys the hard-to-detect cancer cells that have
cells counteracts this adverse effect. A bone marrow
spread and are circulating in the body. Chemotherapeutic
transplant is the removal of marrow from one person and
drugs can be taken either orally (by mouth) or intra-
the transplant of the blood-forming cells either to the
venously,and may be given alone or in conjunction with
same person or to someone else. Bone-marrow trans-
surgery,radiation or both.
plantation,while not a therapy in itself,is often used to
When chemotherapy is used before surgery or radia- “rescue” a patient, by allowing those with cancer to
tion,it is known as primary chemotherapy or “neoadju- undergo very aggressive therapy.
vant chemotherapy.” An advantage of neoadjuvant
Many different specialists generally work together
chemotherapy is that since the cancer cells have not been
as a team to treat cancer patients. An oncologist is a
exposed to anti-cancer drugs,they are especially vulnera-
physician who specializes in cancer care. The oncologist
ble. It can therefore be used effectively to reduce the size
provides chemotherapy,hormone therapy,and any other
of the tumor for surgery or target it for radiation. Howev-
non-surgical treatment that does not involve radiation.
er, the toxic effects of neoadjuvant chemotherapy are
The oncologist often serves as the primary physician and
severe. In addition,it may make the body less tolerant to
coordinates the patient’s treatment plan.
the side effects of other treatments that follow such as
radiation therapy. The more common use of chemothera- The radiation oncologist specializes in using radia-
py is adjuvant therapy, which is given to enhance the tion to treat cancer,while the surgical oncologist performs
effectiveness of other treatments For example, after the operations needed to diagnose or treat cancer. Gyne-
surgery,adjuvant chemotherapy is given to destroy any cologist-oncologists and pediatric-oncologists, as their
cancerous cells that still remain in the body. titles suggest, are physicians involved with treating
women’s and children’s cancers respectively. Many other
specialists may also be involved in the care of a cancer
Immunotherapy
patient. For example,radiologists specialize in the use of
Immunotherapy uses the body’s own immune sys- x rays, ultrasounds, computed tomography scans (CT
tem to destroy cancer cells. This form of treatment is scans),MRI imaging and other techniques that are used to
being intensively studied in clinical trials and is not yet diagnose cancer. Hematologists specialize in disorders of
widely available to most cancer patients. The various the blood and are consulted in case of blood cancers and
immunological agents being tested include substances bone marrow cancers. The samples that are removed for
produced by the body (such as the interferons, inter- biopsy are sent to a laboratory,where a pathologist exam-
leukins,and growth factors),monoclonal antibodies and ines them to determine the type of cancer and extent of
vaccines. Unlike traditional vaccines,cancer vaccines do the disease. Only some of the specialists who are involved
not prevent cancer. Instead, they are designed to treat with cancer care have been mentioned above. There are
people who already have the disease. Cancer vaccines many other specialties,and virtually any type of medical
work by boosting the body’s immune system and training or surgical specialist may become involved with care of
the immune cells to specifically destroy cancer cells. the cancer patient should it become necessary.
Hormone therapy
Alternative treatment
Hormone therapy is standard treatment for some
There are a multitude of alternative treatments avail-
types of cancers that are hormone-dependent and grow
able to help the person with cancer. They can be used in
faster in the presence of particular hormones. These
conjunction with,or separate from,surgery,chemothera-
include cancer of the prostate,breast,and uterus. Hor-
py,and radiation therapy. Alternative treatment of cancer
mone therapy involves blocking the production or action
is a complicated arena and a trained health practitioner
of these hormones. As a result the growth of the tumor
should be consulted.
slows down and survival may be extended for several
months or years. Although the effectiveness of complementary thera-
pies such as acupuncturein alleviating cancer pain has
not been clinically proven,many cancer patients find it
Bone marrow transplantation
safe and beneficial. Bodywork therapies such as massage
The bone marrow is the tissue within the bone cavi- and reflexologyease muscle tension and may alleviate
ties that contains blood-forming cells. Healthy bone the side effects such as nausea and vomiting. Home-
marrow tissue constantly replenishes the blood supply opathyand herbal remedies used in Chinese traditional
636 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnaC
herbal medicine have also been shown to alleviate some
of the side effects of radiation and chemotherapy and are
being recommended by many doctors.
Certain foods including many vegetables,fruits and
grains are believed to offer protection against various
cancers. However,isolation of the individual constituent
of vegetables and fruits that are anti-cancer agents has
proven difficult. In laboratory studies,vitaminssuch as
A, C and E, as well as compounds such as isothio-
cyanates and dithiolthiones found in broccoli, cauli-
flower,and cabbage,and beta-carotene found in carrots
have been shown to protect against cancer. Studies have
shown that eating a diet rich in fiber as found in fruits
and vegetables reduces the risk of colon cancer. Exercise
and a low fat diet help control weight and reduce the risk
of endometrial,breast,and colon cancer.
Certain drugs, which are currently being used for
treatment, could also be suitable for prevention. For
example,the drug tamoxifen (Nolvadex),which has been
very effective against breast cancer, is currently being
tested by the National Cancer Institute for its ability to
prevent cancer. Similarly,retinoids derived from vitamin
A are being tested for their ability to slow the progression
or prevent head and neck cancers. Certain studies have
suggested that cancer incidence is lower in areas where
soil and foods are rich in the mineral selenium. More tri-
with a similar population that is free of cancer. It is
als are needed to explain these intriguing connections.
important to note that while statistics can give some
information about the average survival experience of
cancer patients in a given population,it cannot be used to
Prognosis
indicate individual prognosis, because no two patients
“Lifetime risk” is the term that cancer researchers are exactly alike.
use to refer to the probability that an individual over the
course of a lifetime will develop cancer or die from it. In
Prevention
the United States,men have a one in two lifetime risk of
developing cancer, and for women the risk is one in According to nutritionists and epidemiologists from
three. Overall, African-Americans are more likely to leading universities in the United States, a person can
develop cancer than whites. African-Americans are also reduce the chances of getting cancer by following some
30% more likely to die of cancer than whites. simple guidelines:
•eating plenty of vegetables and fruits
Most cancers are curable if detected and treated at
their early stages. A cancer patient’s prognosis is affected •exercising vigorously for at least 20 minutes every day
by many factors, particularly the type of cancer the
•avoiding excessive weight gain
patient has,the stage of the cancer,the extent to which it
•avoiding tobacco (even second hand smoke)
has metastasized and the aggressiveness of the cancer. In
addition,the patient’s age,general health status and the •decreasing or avoiding consumption of animal fats and
effectiveness of the treatment being pursued are also red meats
important factors.
•avoiding excessive amounts of alcohol
To help predict the future course and outcome of the
•avoiding the midday sun (between 11 A.M. and 3 P.M.)
disease and the likelihood of recovery from the disease,
when the suns rays are the strongest
doctors often use statistics. The five-year survival rates
•avoiding risky sexual practices
are the most common measures used. The number refers
to the proportion of people with cancer who are expected •avoiding known carcinogens in the environment or
to be alive,five years after initial diagnosis,compared work place
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 637
Cancer
A transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of two spindle
cell nuclei from a human sarcoma.Sarcomas are cancers of
the connective tissue (bone,nerves,smooth muscle).(Pho-
tograph by Dr.Brian Eyden, Photo Researchers, Inc.Repro-
duced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Benign—A growth that does not spread to other Immunotherapy—Treatment of cancer by stimulat-
parts of the body. Recovery is favorable with treat- ing the body’s immune defense system.
ment.
Malignant—A general term for cells that can dis-
Biopsy—The surgical removal and microscopic lodge from the original tumor, invade and destroy
examination of living tissue for diagnostic purposes. other tissues and organs.
Bone marrow—Spongy material that fills the inner
Metastasis—The spread of cancer from one part of
cavities of the bones. The progenitors of all the
the body to another.
blood cells are produced in this bone marrow.
Radiation therapy—Treatment using high-energy
Carcinogen—Any substance capable of causing
radiation from x-ray machines, cobalt, radium, or
cancer by mutating the cell’s DNA.
other sources.
Chemotherapy—Treatment with drugs that are anti
Sore—An open wound or a bruise or lesion on the
cancer.
skin.
Epithelium—The layer of cells covering the body’s
surface and lining the internal organs and various Tumor—An abnormal growth resulting from a cell
glands. that lost its normal growth control restraints and
started multiplying uncontrollably.
Hormone therapy—Treatment of cancer by inhibit-
ing the production of hormones such as testos- X rays—High-energy radiation used in high doses,
terone and estrogen. either to diagnose or treat disease.
Resources Cancer chemotherapy drugs see Anticancer
drugs
BOOKS
Buckman,Robert. What You Really Need to Know about Can-
cer:A Comprehensive Guide for Patients and Their Fami-
lies.Johns Hopkins University Press,1997.
Morra,Marion E. Choices.Avon Books,October 1994.
Murphy,Gerald P. American Cancer Textbook of Clinical
Oncology. American Cancer Society,1995. Cancer therapy, definitive
Murphy,Gerald P. Informed Decisions:The Complete Book of
Cancer Diagnosis,Treatment and Recovery.American Definition
Cancer Society,1997.
Simone,Joseph V. “Oncology:Introduction.”In Cecil Textbook Definitive cancer therapy is a treatment plan
of Medicine,edited by Russel L. Cecil et al. Philadelphia: designed to potentially cure cancer using one or a combi-
W.B. Saunders Company,2000. nation of interventions including surgery, radiation,
chemical agents,or biological therapies.
PERIODICALS
“What You Need to Know about Cancer.”Scientific American
(September 1996).
Purpose
ORGANIZATIONS
The primary purpose of definitive care is to establish
American Cancer Society (National Headquarters). 1599
a cure and to destruct and remove all cancer cells from
Clifton Road,N.E. Atlanta,GA 30329. (800) 227-2345.
the infected person.
<http://www.cancer.org>.
Cancer Research Institute (National Headquarters). 681 Fifth Surgery is not only a diagnostic tool,but also used
Avenue,New York,NY 10022. (800) 992-2623. <http://
for tumor removal. The surgeon usually identifies poten-
www.cancerresearch.org>.
tial candidates for tumor removal and repairs intraopera-
National Cancer Institute. 9000 Rockville Pike,Building 31,
tively (during the operation procedure). Surgery can be
room 10A16,Bethesda,Maryland,20892. (800) 422-
curative for some stomach, genital/urinary, thyroid,
6237. <http://wwwicic.nci.nih.gov>.
breast,skin,and central nervous system cancers. The best
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt chance for a surgical cure is usually with the first opera-
638 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
evitinifed
,ypareht
recnaC
tion. It is essential that the cancer surgeon (oncologic sur- the optimal dose may be exceedingly elevated above
geon) be experienced in the specific procedure. patient tolerance.
Radiation therapy is commonly administered to
approximately 50% of cancer patients during the course of
Description
illness. It can be used as the sole method of cure for tumors
in the mouth and neighboring structures in the oral cavity, Surgery
vagina,prostate,cervix,esophagus,Hodgkin’s disease,
Surgical removal of the tumor must be performed with
and certain types of cancer in the spinal cord and brain.
care and accuracy. The surgeon must avoid over manipula-
Research and clinical trials have demonstrated that combi-
tion of the surgical field. Too much movement within the
nation treatment is more effective than radiotherapy alone.
area can cause cancer cell displacement into surrounding
Chemotherapyis curative for only a small percent- tissue. If this occurs and no further treatment is indicated,
age of cancers. It is most effective for choriocarcinoma, the tumor may grow again. The surgeon should also per-
cancer of the testis,some types of lymphomas,and can- form an assessment concerning tissue removal around the
cer of skeletal muscles. cancer site. Tissue around the site may not by inspection
seem cancerous,but adjacent structures may have cancer
Biological therapies are a new and promising direc-
cells and surrounding tissue removal is usually part of the
tion for cancer cures. Usually when cancer cells grow
operative procedure. Pieces of tumor and the surrounding
they manage to derive a blood supply that allows passage
area are analyzed microscopically during the operation for
of nutrients promoting continuation of abnormal cancer
cell type. An adequate resection (removal of tissue) will
growth. Research that focuses on destroying these blood
reveal normal cells in the specimens analyzed from areas
vessels is called angiogenesis. Cutting off the blood sup-
bordering the cancerous growth. Surgery can also help to
ply has been shown to destroy tumors, since this stops
decrease the tumor bulk and,along with other treatment
the flow of essential nutrients required for cancer growth.
measures,may provide a cure for certain cancers.
Use of certain growth factors can also stimulate self-
destructive pathways in cancer cells (apoptosis). Gene Not only can surgery be curative for some cancers,
therapyis directed towards inhibiting specific cellular but it is an essential diagnostic tool that must be assessed
signals that promote cancer cell multiplication. intraoperatively since microscopic analysis will guide
the surgeon concerning tumor and surrounding tissue
removal. These diagnostic procedures include an aspira-
Precautions
tion biopsy,which inserts a needle to extract (aspirate)
Surgical resection requires an experienced surgeon, fluid contained inside a cancerous growth; a needle biop-
preoperative assessment,imaging studies,and delicate sy uses a specialized needle to obtain a core tissue speci-
operative technique. Care should be taken during the pro- men; an incision biopsy removes a section from a large
cedure to avoid unnecessary tumor manipulation,which tumor; and an excision biopsy removes the entire tumor.
can cause cancer cells to infiltrate adjacent structures. If The surgeon can also take samples of neighboring lymph
manipulation is excessive,cells can enter nearby areas nodes. Cancer in surrounding lymph nodes is an impor-
for future re-growth. Accurate isolation of the tumor can tant avenue for distant spread of cancer to other areas. If
also help to avoid contamination of the surgical area. microscopic analysis determines the presence of cancer
Early ligation of the blood supply to the tumor is an cells in lymph nodes then the surgeon may decide to per-
essential component of a surgical cure. form a more aggressive surgical approach.
Radiotherapy requires extensive treatment planning
and imaging. Care must be taken to localize the cancer Radiation therapy
field while attempting to spare destruction of normal tis-
Similar to surgical intervention, radiotherapy is a
sue. This requires image monitoring and exact position-
localized treatment. It involves the administration of ion-
ing during radiation treatment sessions.
izing radiation to a solid tumor location. This generates
Chemotherapy usually causes destruction of normal
reactive oxygen molecules, causing the destruction of
cells,and cancer cells can become immune to chemical
DNA in local cells. There are three commonly used
destruction. Side effects and patient tolerance issues are
radiotherapy beams:gamma rays from a linear accelera-
typically anticipated and dosages may have to be specifi-
tor machine produce a focused beam; orthovoltage rays
cally altered. Very few chemotherapeutic agents offer
are of less energy,thus penetrate less and typically deliv-
curative responses.
er higher doses to superficial tissues (efficient for treat-
Biological therapies may cause patient toxicity ing skin cancers); and megavoltage rays are high energy
resulting in extensive side effects. This can occur since producing beams and can penetrate deeply situated inter-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 639
Cancer
therapy,
definitive
localization to spare normal tissues,calibration of fractionat-
KEY TERMS ed doses,and specific positioning during treatment sessions.
Patients who receive curative chemotherapy should
Bone marrow suppression—A decrease in cells be informed of possible side effects associated with the
responsible for providing immunity, carrying oxygen chemotherapeutic agent. Patients should also be informed
and those responsible for normal blood clotting. of temporary lifestyle changes and medications that may
offer some symptomatic relief.
DNA—The molecule responsible for cell multipli-
cation. Patients undergoing biologic therapies are usually
advised of potential side effects, treatment cycles and
Titrate—To analyze the best end point (for dose)
specific tests for monitoring progress according to the
for a medication.
specific research protocol.
Aftercare
nal organs, while sparing extensive skin damage. Two Patients will typically be evaluated by imaging stud-
common routes can deliver radiation. Brachytherapy ies, blood analysis, physical examination, and health
delivers radiation to a local area by placing radioactive improvement. These follow-up visits usually occur at spe-
materials within close proximity to the cancerous site. cific time intervals during the course of treatment. Surgi-
Teletherapy delivers radiation to a specific area using an cal patients may require closer observation during the ini-
external beam machine. tial post-operative period to avoid potential complica-
tions. Reconstructive surgery can be considered to
Chemotherapy improve appearance and restore function. Certain surgical
procedures (such as flaps and microsurgery of blood ves-
Curative chemotherapy usually requires multiple
sels) can restore new tissues to a previous surgery site.
administrations of the chemical agent. Chemotherapy or
systemic therapy is administered in the blood and circu-
Risks
lates through the entire body. The choice of chemothera-
peutic agents depends on the specific type of cancer. Surgical risks
Chemotherapy is more commonly used for metastatic
Surgical therapy can be both disfiguring and dis-
(malignant cancer which has spread to other areas
abling. Many normal tissues can be adversely affected
beyond the primary site of cancer growth) disease,since
by radiotherapy. Side effects that commonly occur
very few cancers are cured by systemic therapy.
shortly after a treatment cycle include nausea,vomiting,
fatigue,loss of appetite,and bone marrow suppression
Biologic therapy
(a decrease in the cells that provide defense against
Biologic therapies primarily function to alter the infections and those which carry oxygen to cells).
patient’s response to cancer. These treatments are mostly
investigations and there are numerous research protocols Radiation risks
studying the effects of biologic treatments. These proto- Radiotherapy can also cause difficulty swallowing,
cols usually have strict admission criteria that may oral gum disease,and dry mouth. Additionally,radia-
exclude potential candidates who can benefit from treat- tion therapy can cause damage to local structures within
ment. These treatments tend to stimulate specific immune the irradiated field.
cells or immune chemicals to destroy cancer cells.
Chemotherapy risks
Chemotherapy commonly causes bone marrow
Preparation
suppression. Additionally, a cell called platelets—
For all treatment modalities imaging studies,biopsy,
important for normal blood clotting—may be signifi-
and constant blood analysis is essential before,during,
cantly lowered,causing patients to bleed. This may be
and after treatments. Surgical candidates should undergo
problematic enough to limit the treatment course. Bone
extensive pre-operative evaluation with imaging studies,
marrow suppression can increase susceptibility to
blood chemistry analysis, stabilized health status, and
infection and also cause infertility. Patients commonly
readiness of staff for any potential complications and cell
have bouts of nausea and vomiting shortly after a
biopsy analysis. Patients with other pre-existing chronic
treatment session. Rapidly multiplying normal cells are
disease may require intensive post-operative monitoring.
also affected such as skin cells (causing blistering and
For radiotherapy,the patient undergoes extensive imag- ulceration) and hair cells (causing loss of hair,a condi-
ing studies. Additional planning strategies include beam tion called alopecia).
640 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
evitinifed
,ypareht
recnaC
Biologic therapies risks can also alleviate pain,bleeding,and obstruction of neigh-
boring areas. Chemotherapy may be helpful to reduce
Biologic therapies can cause patients to develop sup-
tumor size and provide some reduction to metastatic dis-
pression of cells that help the body fight against infec-
ease. Long-term chemotherapy patients develop drug
tion. Administration of certain chemicals that have anti-
resistance,a situation that renders chemotherapeutic treat-
cancer effects can cause heart damage. Injection of killer
ments ineffective. If this occurs patients are usually given
immune cells (lymphokine-activated killer cells) may
a second line medication or,if admission criteria are met,
cause bone marrow suppression,and the host may reject
they may participate in an experimental research protocol.
the newly introduced cells.
Palliative treatments and terminal cancer in combination
can cause many symptoms that can become problematic.
Resources
These symptoms commonly include pain,nausea,vomit-
BOOKS ing, difficulty in breathing, constipation, dehydration,
Abeloff,Martin D.,et al. Clinical Oncology.2nd ed. Churchill agitation,and delirium. The palliative treatment-planning
Livingstone,Inc,2000. goal focuses to reduce these symptoms.
Fauci,Anthony S.,et al,eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine.14th ed. McGraw Hill,1998.
Goroll,Allan H.,et al,eds. Primary Care Medicine.4th ed. Precautions
Lippincott,Williams & Wilkins,2000. Surgery for the purpose of tumor removal,biopsy,or
OTHER size reduction is associated with postoperative pain and
American Cancer Society.<http://www.cancer.org>. local nerve damage,which may be both severe and difficult
National Cancer Institute.<http://cnetdb.nci.nih.gov/cancerlit. to alleviate. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy can also
shtml.>. produce nerve damage and severe pain. Additionally,
patients with malignant cancer are susceptible to infections
Laith Farid Gulli,M.D. like herpes, pneumonia, urinary tract infections, and
Nicole Mallory,M.S. wound abscess,all of which can cause severe pain. Pain
associated with cancer and/or treatments can significantly
impair the patient’s capabilities for performing daily tasks
and hence impair quality of life. These complications may
negatively impact the patient’s psychological well being.
Cancer therapy, palliative
Description
Definition
Pain is one of the common symptoms associated with
Palliative cancer therapy is treatment specifically
cancer. Approximately 75% of terminal cancer patients
directed to help improve the symptoms associated with
have pain. Pain is a subjective symptom and thus it cannot
terminal cancer.
be measured using technological approaches. Pain can be
assessed using numeric scales (from one to 10,one is rated
Purpose as no pain while 10 is severe) or rating specific facial
expressions associated with various levels of pain. The
Palliative care is directed to improving symptoms
majority of cancer patients experience pain as a result of
associated with incurable cancer. Care can include
tumor mass that compresses neighboring nerves,bone,or
surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, sympto-
soft tissues,or from direct nerve injury (neuropathic pain).
matic treatments resulting from cancer,and side effects
Pain can occur from affected nerves in the ribs,muscles,
of treatment. The primary objective of palliative care is
and internal structures such as the abdomen (cramping
to improve the quality of remaining duration of life.
type pain associated with obstruction). Many patients also
Treatment usually involves a combination of modalities
experience various types of pain as a direct result of fol-
(multimodality approach) and numerous specialists are
low-up tests,treatments (surgery,radiation,and chemo-
typically involved in the treatment planning process.
therapy) and diagnostic procedures (i.e.,biopsy).
Therapeutic planning usually involves meticulous coor-
dination with the treatment team.
Preparation
Surgery can be utilized for palliation after careful
evaluation and planning. The use of surgery in these cases Patients are typically informed that their diagnosis is
may reduce the tumor bulk and help improve the quality of terminal and treatments are directed to improve quality
life by relieving pain,alleviating obstruction,or control- of life for the remaining time and to minimize emotional
ling bleeding. Radiotherapy for terminal cancer patients suffering associated with pain.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 641
Cancer
therapy,
palliative
Fauci,Anthony S.,et al.,eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal
KEY TERMS Medicine.14th ed. McGraw Hill,1998.
Goroll,Allan H.,et al.,eds. Primary Care Medicine.4th ed.
Lippincott,Williams & Wilkins,2000.
Opioids—Narcotic pain killing medication.
Washington Manual of Medical Therapeutics.30th ed. Wash-
World Health Organization (WHO)—An interna- ington University School of Medicine,Department of
tional organization concerned with world health Medicine,2001.
and welfare.
PERIODICALS
Mercadante,S.,F. Fulfaro,and A. Casuccio. “The Impact of
Home Palliative Care on Symptoms in Advanced Cancer
Patients.”Support Care Cancer(July 2000).
A careful history is necessary to assess duration,sever-
ity,and location of pain. A physical examinationmay ver- ORGANIZATIONS
ify the presence of pain. Imaging analysis may further con- National Cancer Institute. <http://cnetdb.nci.nih.gov/cancerlit.
firm the presence of potential causes of pain. The World shtml>.
American Cancer Society. <http://www.cancer.org>.
Health Organization (WHO) recommends an analgesic lad-
American Pain Society. <http://www.ampiansoc.org>.
der. This treatment approach provides medication selec-
tions based on previous analgesic use and severity of pain.
Laith Farid Gulli,M.D.
The ladder starts with the use of non-opioid (non-mor-
Nicole Mallory,M.S.
phine) drugs such as aspirin, acetaminophin, or non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory medications for control of mild
pain. Chronic pain must be treated with constant and con-
sistently administered medication(s). The “take as needed”
approach is not advised. Supplemental doses may be rec-
Cancer therapy, supportive
ommended in addition to the standard dose for circum-
stances that may worsen pain. Opioids (i.e.,morphine and
Definition
codeine) are the medications of choice for moderate to
severe pain. Doses are adjusted to produce maximum pain Supportive cancertherapy is the use of medicines to
relief while minimizing side effects. These medications are counteract unwanted effects of cancer treatment.
conveniently administered orally. Administering steroids
can help reduce nausea and vomiting. Delirium and anxi-
Purpose
etymay be improved by psychoactive medications.
Along with their beneficial effects, many cancer
treatments produce uncomfortable and sometimes harm-
Aftercare
ful side effects. For example, cancer drugs may cause
Care for palliation is continuous and consistent for nausea or vomiting. They may also destroy red or white
the remainder of life. Patients who have less than six blood cells,resulting in a low blood count. Fortunately,
months of life remaining may choose a hospice to stop many of these side effects can be relieved with other
treatment and control pain. medicines.
Description
Risks
Different kinds of drugs are used for different pur-
Patients taking opioids for pain relief can develop tol-
poses in supportive cancer therapy. To relieve nausea
erance and dependence. Tolerance develops when a patient
and vomiting, a physician may prescribe dolasetron
requires increasing amounts of medication to produce pain
(Anzemet),granisetron (Kytril) or ondansetron (Zofran).
reduction. Dependence shows characteristic withdrawal
Drugs called colony stimulating factors are used to help
symptoms if medications are abruptly stopped. These
the bone marrow make new white blood cells to replace
symptoms can be avoided by tapering down doses in the
those destroyed by cancer treatment. Examples of colony
event that these medications should be stopped.
stimulating factors are filgrastim (Neupogen) and sar-
gramostim (Leukine). Another type of drug, epoetin
Resources (Epogen,Procrit),stimulates the bone marrow to make
BOOKS new red blood cells. It is a synthetically made version of
Abeloff,Martin D.,et al. Clinical Oncology.2nd ed. Churchill human erythropoietin that is made naturally in the body
Livingstone,Inc,2000. and has the same effect on bone marrow.
642 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
evitroppus
,ypareht
recnaC
Some physicians who treat cancer recommend that Seeing a physician regularly while taking this medi-
their patients use marijuanato relieve nausea and vom- cine is important. This will give the physician a chance to
iting. This practice is controversial for several reasons. make sure the medicine is working and to check for
Using marijuana,even for medicinal purposes,is illegal unwanted side effects.
in most states. Also,most of the evidence that marijuana
People with certain medical conditions may have
effectively relieves nausea and vomiting comes from
problems if they take colony stimulating factors. In peo-
reports of people who have used it, not from carefully
ple who have kidney disease,liver disease,or conditions
designed scientific studies. An oral medication that con-
caused by inflammation or immune system problems,
tains one of the active ingredients of marijuana is avail-
colony stimulating factors may make these problems
able with a physician’s prescription and sometimes is
worse. People with heart disease may be more likely to
used to treat nausea and vomiting in patients undergoing
have side effects such as water retention and heart
cancer treatment. However,the drug,dronabinol (Mari-
rhythm problems when they take these drugs. And people
nol), takes longer to work than smoked marijuana and
with lung disease may be more likely to have shortness
may be difficult for patients with nausea and vomiting to
of breath. Anyone who has any of these medical condi-
swallow and keep down.
tions should check with his or her physician before using
In 1997, the National Institutes of Health issued a colony stimulating factors.
report calling for more research into medical uses of
marijuana. The panel of experts who wrote the report
Epoetin
also recommended that researchers investigate other
ways of getting the active ingredients of marijuana into This medicine may cause seizures (convulsions),
the body,such as nasal sprays,skin patches and inhalers. especially in people with a history of seizures. Anyone
who takes these drugs should not drive,use machines or
Patients who want to use marijuana to relieve side
do anything else that might be dangerous if they have had
effects of cancer treatment should talk to their physicians
a seizure.
and should carefully consider the benefits and risks,both
medical and legal. Epoetin helps the body make new red blood cells,but
it cannot do its job unless there is plenty of iron in the
body. The physician may recommend taking iron supple-
Recommended dosage ments or certain vitaminsthat help get iron into the body.
Follow the physician’s orders to make sure the body has
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
enough iron for this medicine to work. Do not take iron
supportive cancer therapy. Check with the physician who
supplements unless they are prescribed by a physician.
prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the pre-
scription for the correct dosage. In studies of laboratory animals,epoetin taken dur-
ing pregnancycaused birth defects,including damage
to the bones and spine. However,the drug has not been
Precautions
reported to cause problems in human babies whose
Dolasetron, granisetron and ondansetron mothers take it. Women who are pregnant or who may
become pregnant should check with their physicians for
If severe nausea and vomiting occur after taking this
the most up-to-date information on the safety of taking
medicine,check with a physician.
this medicine during pregnancy.
The use of ondansetron after abdominal surgery may
People with certain medical conditions may have
cover up symptoms of stomach problems.
problems if they take this medicine. For example, the
People with liver disease may be more likely to have chance of side effects may be greater in people with high
side effects from ondansetron. blood pressure,heart or blood vessel disease or a history
of blood clots. Epoetin may not work properly in people
who have bone problems or sickle cell anemia.
Colony stimulating factors
Certain cancer drugs reduce the body’s ability to
Dronabinol
fight infections. Although colony stimulating factors help
restore the body’s natural defenses, the process takes This medicine contains sesame oil and one of the
time. Getting prompt treatment for infections is impor- active ingredients of marijuana. Anyone who has had
tant,even while taking this medicine. Call the physician allergic or unusual reactions to sesame oil or marijuana
at the first sign of illness or infection, such as a sore products should let his or her physician know before tak-
throat,feveror chills. ing dronabinol.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 643
Cancer
therapy,
supportive
or lying down. Getting up gradually and holding onto
KEY TERMS something for support should lessen the problem.
In laboratory studies,giving high doses of dronabi-
Bipolar disorder—A severe mental illness in nol to pregnant animals increased the risk of the unborn
which a person has extreme mood swings, ranging baby’s death. The medicine’s effects on pregnant women
from a highly excited state—sometimes with a have not been studied. Women who are pregnant or who
false sense of well-being—to depression may become pregnant should check with their physicians
Bone marrow—Soft tissue that fills the hollow before taking this medicine.
centers of bones. Blood cells and platelets (disk- Dronabinol passes into breast milk and may affect
shaped bodies in the blood that are important in nursing babies whose mothers take the medicine. Women
clotting) are produced in the bone marrow. who are breastfeeding their babies should check with
Hallucination—A false or distorted perception of their physicians before using dronabinol.
objects, sounds, or events that seems real. Hallucina- Because of its possible mind-altering effects,dron-
tions usually result from drugs or mental disorders. abinol should be used with care in children and older
Immune system—The body’s natural defenses people. Both children and older people should be
against disease and infection. watched carefully when they are taking this medicine.
Inflammation—Pain, redness, swelling, and heat Using dronabinol may worsen some medical condi-
that usually develop in response to injury or illness. tions,including high blood pressure,heart disease,bipo-
lar disorderand schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia—A severe mental disorder in
which people lose touch with reality and may
General precautions for all types of supportive
have illogical thoughts, delusions, hallucinations,
cancer therapy
behavioral problems and other disturbances.
Sickle cell anemia—An inherited disorder in which Anyone who previously has had unusual reactions to
red blood cells contain an abnormal form of hemo- drugs used in supportive cancer therapy should let his or
globin, a protein that carries oxygen. The abnormal her physician know before taking the drugs again. The
form of hemoglobin causes the red cells to become physician should also be told about any allergies to
sickle- or crescent-shaped. The misshapen cells foods,dyes,preservatives,or other substances.
may clog blood vessels, preventing oxygen from
reaching tissues and leading to pain, blood clots
Side effects
and other problems. Sickle cell anemia is most
common in people of African descent and in peo- Dolasetron, granisetron and ondansetron
ple from Italy, Greece, India, and the Middle East.
The most common minor side effects are headache,
dizziness or lightheadedness, drowsiness, dry mouth,
diarrhea, constipation, abdominal pain or stomach
Because dronabinol works on the central nervous sys- cramps and unusual tiredness or weakness. These prob-
tem,it may add to the effects of alcohol and other drugs lems usually do not require medical treatment.
that slow down the central nervous system. Examples of
Check with a physician as soon as possible if fever
these drugs are antihistamines, cold medicine, allergy
occurs after taking granisetron.
medicine,sleep aids,medicine for seizures,tranquilizers,
If any of these symptoms occur after taking ondan-
some painrelievers,and muscle relaxants. Dronabinol
setron,check with a physician immediately:
may also add to the effects of anesthetics,including those
used for dental procedures. Anyone taking dronabinol •breathing problems or wheezing
should not drink alcohol and should check with his or her
•chest pain or tightness in chest
physician before taking any of the drugs listed above.
•skin rash,hivesor itching
This drug makes some people feel drowsy, dizzy,
lightheaded or “high,” with a sense of well-being.
Colony stimulating factors
Because of these possible reactions,anyone who takes
dronabinol should not drive,use machines or do anything As this medicine starts to work,it may cause mild
else that might be dangerous until they have found out pain in the lower back or hips. This is nothing to worry
how the drug affects them. The dizzinessand lighthead- about,and it will usually go away within a few days. If
edness are especially likely when getting up after sitting the pain is too uncomfortable, the physician may pre-
644 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
evitroppus
,ypareht
recnaC
scribe a painkiller. Be sure to let the physician know if toms during or after treatment with these drugs should
the painkiller does not help. get in touch with his or her physician.
Other possible side effects include headache,joint or
muscle pain,and skin rash or itching. These side effects Interactions
usually go away as the body adjusts to the medicine and Anyone who has supportive cancer therapy should
do not need medical treatment. If they continue or they let the physician know all other medicines he or she is
interfere with normal activities,check with a physician. taking. Some combinations of drugs may interact,which
may increase or decrease the effects of one or both drugs
Epoetin or may increase the risk of side effects. Ask the physician
whether the possible interactions can interfere with drug
This medicine may cause flu-like symptoms,such as
therapy or cause harmful effects.
muscle aches, bone pain, fever, chills, shivering, and
sweating,within a few hours after it is taken. These symp-
Resources
toms usually go away within 12 hours. If they do not,or if
they are troubling,check with a physician. Other possible PERIODICALS
side effects that do not need medical attention are diar- “Marijuana as Medicine:How Strong is the Science?”Con-
rhea,nausea or vomiting,and tiredness or weakness. sumer Reports62 (May 1997):62.
Morris,Kelly. “The Cannabis Remedy—Wonder Worker or
Certain side effects should be brought to a physi-
Evil Weed?”The Lancet350 (20 Dec.1997):1828.
cian’s attention as soon as possible. These include
headache, vision problems, increased blood pressure,
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
fast heartbeat,weight gain,and swelling of the face,fin-
gers,lower legs,ankles or feet.
Candida albicans infection see Candidiasis
Anyone who has chest pain or seizures after taking
epoetin should check with a physician immediately.
Dronabinol
Side effects such as dizziness,drowsiness,confusion Candidiasis
and clumsiness or unsteadiness usually do not need med-
Definition
ical attention unless they are long-lasting or they inter-
fere with normal activities. Candidiasis is an infection caused by a species of the
yeast Candida,usually Candida albicans. This is a com-
Other side effects or signs of overdose should have
mon cause of vaginal infections in women. Also,Candida
immediate medical attention. These include:
may cause mouth infections in people with reduced
•fast or pounding heartbeat
immune function,or in patients taking certain antibiotics.
•constipation Candidacan be found in virtually all normal people but
•trouble urinating causes problems in only a fraction. In recent years,howev-
er,several serious categories of candidiasis have become
•red eyes
more common, due to overuse of antibiotics, the rise of
•slurred speech
AIDS,the increase in organ transplantations,and the use of
•mood changes, including depression, nervousness or invasive devices (catheters,artificial joints and valves)—all
anxiety of which increase a patient’s susceptibility to infection.
•confusion
•forgetfulness Description
•changes in sight,smell,taste,touch or hearing Vaginal candidiasis
•a sense that time is speeding up or slowing down
Over one million women in the United States devel-
•hallucinations op vaginal yeast infections each year. It is not life-threat-
ening,but it can be uncomfortable and frustrating.
General advice on side effects for all types of
supportive cancer therapy Oral candidiasis
Other side effects are possible with any type of sup- This disorder,also known as thrush,causes white,
portive cancer therapy. Anyone who has unusual symp- curd-like patches in the mouth or throat.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 645
Candidiasis
surgery, burns, nasogastric tubes, and catheters—can
predispose a person for deep organ candidiasis. Rising
numbers of AIDS patients,organ transplant recipients,
and other individuals whose immune systems are com-
promised help account for the dramatic increase in deep
organ candidiasis in recent years. Patients with granulo-
cytopenia (deficiency of white blood cells) are particular-
ly at risk for deep organ candidiasis.
Diagnosis
Often clinical appearance gives a strong suggestion
about the diagnosis. Generally, a clinician will take a
sample of the vaginal discharge or swab an area of oral
plaque, and then inspect this material under a micro-
scope. Under the microscope,it is possible to see charac-
teristic forms of yeasts at various stages in the lifecycle.
Fungal blood cultures should be taken for patients
suspected of having deep organ candidiasis. Tissue biop-
sy may be needed for a definitive diagnosis.
Treatment
Vaginal candidiasis
Deep organ candidiasis
In most cases, vaginal candidiasis can be treated
Also known as invasive candidiasis,deep organ candidi- successfully with a variety of over-the-counter antifungal
asis is a serious systemic infection that can affect the esopha- creams or suppositories. These include Monistat,Gyne-
gus,heart,blood,liver,spleen,kidneys,eyes,and skin. Like Lotrimin,and Mycelex. However,infections often recur.
vaginal and oral candidiasis,it is an opportunistic disease If a women has frequent recurrences,she should consult
that strikes when a person’s resistance is lowered,often due her doctor about prescription drugs such as Vagistat-1,
to another illness. There are many diagnostic categories of Diflucan,and others.
deep organ candidiasis,depending on the tissues involved.
Oral candidiasis
Causes and symptoms
This is usually treated with prescription lozenges or
Vaginal candidiasis
mouthwashes. Some of the most-used prescriptions are
Most women with vaginal candidiasis experience nystatin mouthwashes (Nilstat or Nitrostat) and clotrima-
severe vaginal itching. They also have a discharge that zole lozenges.
often looks like cottage cheese and has a sweet or bread-
like odor. The vulva and vagina can be red,swollen,and Deep organ candidiasis
painful. Sexual intercourse can also be painful.
The recent increase in deep organ candidiasis has led
to the creation of treatment guidelines,including,but not
Oral candidiasis
limited to,the following:Catheters should be removed
Whitish patches can appear on the tongue,inside of from patients in whom these devices are still present.
the cheeks, or the palate. Oral candidiasis typically Antifungal chemotherapy should be started to prevent the
occurs in people with abnormal immune systems. These spread of the disease. Drugs should be prescribed based
can include people undergoing chemotherapyfor can- on a patient’s specific history and defense status.
cer,people taking immunosuppressive drugs to protect
transplanted organs,or people with HIV infection.
Alternative treatment
Deep organ candidiasis
Home remedies for vaginal candidiasis include vine-
Anything that weakens the body’s natural barrier gar douches or insertion of a paste made from Lacto-
against colonizing organisms—including stomach bacillus acidophiluspowder into the vagina. In theory,
646 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisaididnaC
This patient’s tongue is infected with candidiasis.(Photo-
graph by Edward H.Gill, Custom Medical Stock Photo.Repro-
duced by permission.)
these remedies will make the vagina more acidic and
therefore less hospitable to the growth of Candida. Fresh
garlic (Allium sativum) is believed to have antifungal
sible to avoid contact with it. Good vaginal hygiene and
action, so incorporating it into the diet or inserting a
good oral hygienemight reduce problems,but they are
gauze-wrapped,peeled garlic clove into the vagina may
not guarantees against candidiasis.
be helpful. The insert should be changed twice daily.
Some women report success with these remedies; they Because hospital-acquired (nosocomial) deep organ
should try a conventional treatment if an alternative rem- candidiasis is on the rise,people need to be made aware
edy isn’t effective. of it. Patients should be sure that catheters are properly
maintained and used for the shortest possible time
length. The frequency, length, and scope of courses of
Prognosis
antibiotic treatment should also be cut back.
Vaginal candidiasis
Resources
Although most cases of vaginal candidiasis are
cured reliably,these infections can recur. To limit recur- BOOKS
rences,women may need to take a prescription anti-fun- Carlson,K. J.,S. A. Eisenstat,and T. Ziporyn. The Harvard
gal drug such as terconazole (sold as Terazol) or take Guide to Women’s Health.Harvard University Press,1996.
other anti-fungal drugs on a preventive basis.
PERIODICALS
Greenspan,Deborah,and John S. Greenspan. “HIV-Related
Oral candidiasis Oral Disease.“ The Lancet348 (14 Sept. 1996):729-734.
Tobin,Marla J. “Vulvovaginal candidiasis:Topical vs. Oral
These infections can also recur,sometimes because the
Therapy.”American Family Physician51 (15 May 1995):
infecting Candida develops resistance to one drug. There- 1715-1723.
fore,a physician may need to prescribe a different drug.
Richard H. Lampert
Deep organ candidiasis
Candidosis see Candidiasis
The prognosis depends on the category of disease as
well as on the condition of the patient when the infection
strikes. Patients who are already suffering from a serious
underlying disease are more susceptible to deep organ
candidiasis that speads throughout the body.
Canker sores
Prevention Definition
Because Candida is part of the normal group of Canker sores are small sores or ulcers that appear inside
microorganisms that co-exist with all people,it is impos- the mouth. They are painful,self-healing,and can recur.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 647
Canker
sores
KEY TERMS
Biopsy—The removal and examination of tissue
from a live body.
Colonize—To become established in a host.
Granulocytopenia—A condition characterized by
a deficiency of white blood cells.
Nasogastric—Tube inserted through the nasal pas-
sages into the stomach.
Opportunistic—Infection caused by microorgan-
isms that are usually harmless, but which can
cause disease when a host’s resistance is lowered.
A transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of Candida albi-
cans.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.) Systemic—Afflicting an entire body system or the
body in general.
Diagnosis
KEY TERMS
Canker sores are diagnosed by observation of the
blister. A distinction between canker sores and cold sores
Inflammation—A local reaction to tissue injury or
must be made because cold sores are infectious and the
damage, usually characterized by pain, swelling,
herpes infection can be transmitted to other people. The
and redness.
two sores can usually be distinguished visually and there
Sore—A wound, lesion, or ulcer on the skin. are specific diagnostic tests for herpes infection.
Ulcer—A site of damage to the skin or mucous
membrane that is characterized by the formation Treatment
of pus, death of tissue, and is frequently accompa- Since canker sores heal by themselves,treatment is
nied by an inflammatory reaction. not usually necessary. Pain relief remedies,such as topi-
cal anesthetics, may be used to reduce the pain of the
sores. The use of corticosteroid ointments sometimes
speeds healing. Avoidance of spicy or acidic foods can
Description help reduce the pain associated with canker sores.
Canker sores occur on the inside of the mouth,usu-
ally on the inside of the lips,cheeks,and/or soft palate. Alternative treatment
They can also occur on the tongue and in the throat.
Alternative therapies for canker sores are aimed at
Often,several canker sores will appear at the same time
healing existing sores and preventing their recurrence.
and may be grouped in clusters. Canker sores appear as a
Several herbal remedies,including calendula (Calendula
whitish, round area with a red border. The sores are
officinalis), myrrh (Commiphora molmol), and gold-
painful and sensitive to touch. The average canker sore is
enseal (Hydrastis canadensis), may be helpful in the
about one-quarter inch in size,although they can occa-
treatment of existing sores. Compresses soaked in teas
sionally be larger. Canker sores are not infectious.
made from these herbs are applied directly to the sores.
Approximately 20% of the U.S. population is affect- The tannic acid in a tea bag can also help dry up the sores
ed with recurring canker sores, and more women than when the wet tea bag is used as a compress. Taking dan-
men get them. Women are more likely to have canker delion (Taraxacum officinale) tea or capsules may help
sores during their premenstrual period. heal sores and also prevent future outbreaks. Since
Canker sores are sometimes confused with cold canker sores are often brought on by stress,such stress-
sores. Cold sores are caused by herpes simplex virus. relieving techniques as meditation, guided imagery,
This disease,also known as oral herpes or feverblisters, and certain acupressure exercises may help prevent
can occur anywhere on the body. Most commonly,her- canker sores or lessen their severity.
pes infection occurs on the outside of the lips and the
gums,and much less frequently on the inside the mouth. Prognosis
Cold sores are infectious.
There is no cure for canker sores. They do not get
larger or occur more frequently with age.
Causes and symptoms
The exact cause of canker sores is uncertain,howev- Resources
er,they seem to be related to a localized immune reac-
BOOKS
tion. Other proposed causes for this disease are trauma to
Larsen,D. E.,ed. Mayo Clinic Family Health Book.New York:
the affected areas from toothbrush scrapes,stress,hor-
William Morrow,1996.
mones,and food allergies. Canker sores tend to appear Schlossberg,D. Current Therapy of Infectious Disease.St.
in response to stress. The initial symptom is a tingling or Louis:Mosby,1996.
mildly painful itching sensation in the area where the
John T. Lohr,PhD
sore will appear. After one to several days,a small red
swelling appears. The sore is round, and is a whitish
Captopril see Angiotensin-converting
color with a grayish colored center. Usually,there is a red
ring of inflammation surrounding the sore. The main enzyme inhibitors
symptom is pain. Canker sores can be very painful,espe-
Carbamazepine see Anticonvulsant drugs
cially if they are touched repeatedly,e.g.,by the tongue.
They last for one to two weeks. Carbidopa see Antiparkinson drugs
648 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
seros
reknaC
pear when the disease is treated. These include protein
Carbohydrate intolerance deficiency,celiac disease,and some intestinal infections.
Adult lactose intolerance is the most common of all
Definition
enzyme deficiencies,and it is estimated that 30–50 mil-
Carbohydrate intolerance is the inability of the body lion Americans have this condition. Some racial and eth-
to completely process the nutrient carbohydrate (a classi- nic populations are affected more than others. Lactose
fication that includes sugars and starches) into a source of intolerance is found in as many as 75% of African Ameri-
energy for the body,usually because of the deficiency of cans,Jewish Americans,Mexican Americans,and Native
an enzyme needed for digestion. Lactose intolerance,the Americans,and in 90% of Asian Americans. Descendants
inability to digest the sugar found in milk,is widespread of Northern Europeans and some Mediterranean peoples
and affects up to 70% of the world’s adult population. usually do not develop the condition. Deficiencies in
enzymes other than lactase are extremely rare.
Description
Carbohydrates are the primary source of energy and, Causes and symptoms
along with fats and proteins,one of the three major nutri-
Enzymes play an important role in breaking down
ents in the human diet. Carbohydrates are classified
carbohydrates into forms that can pass through the intes-
according to their structure based on the number of basic
tine and be used by the body. Usually they are named by
sugar,or saccharideunits they contain.
adding aseto the name of the substance they act on,so
A monosaccharide is the simplest carbohydrate and lactase is the enzyme needed to process lactose. Cooked
called a simple sugar. Simple sugars include glucose (the starch is broken down in the mouth to a disaccharide by
form in which sugar circulates in the blood), fructose amylase,an enzyme in the saliva. The disaccharides mal-
(found in fruit and honey),and galactose (produced by tose,sucrose,and lactose cannot be absorbed until they
the digestion of milk). These simple sugars are important have been separated into simple sugar molecules by their
because they can be absorbed by the small intestine. Two corresponding enzymes present in the cells lining the
simple sugars linked together make a disaccharide. The intestinal tract. If this process is not completed,digestion
disaccharide sugars present in the diet are maltose (a is interrupted.
product of the digestion of starch),sucrose (table sugar),
Although not common,a deficiency in the enzymes
and lactose (the sugar in milk). These disaccharides must
needed to digest lactose,maltose,and sucrose is some-
be broken down by enzymes into two simple sugars so
times present at birth. Intestinal lactase enzymes usually
that they can be absorbed by the intestine. Polysaccha-
decrease naturally with age,but this happens to varying
rides are much more complex carbohydrates made up of
degrees. Because of the uneven distribution of enzyme
many simple sugars, the most important of which are
deficiency based on race and ethnic heritage,especially
glycogen,which is stored in the liver,and starch.
in lactose intolerance,genetics are believed to play a role
in the cause of primary carbohydrate intolerance.
Digestion of sugars
Digestive diseases such as celiac disease and tropi-
Digestion of food begins in the mouth,moves on to
cal sprue (which affect absorption in the intestine), as
the stomach,and then into the small intestine. Along the
well as intestinal infections and injuries,can reduce the
way, specific enzymes are needed to process different
amount of enzymes produced. In cancerpatients,treat-
types of sugars. An enzyme is a substance that acts as a
ment with radiation therapy or chemotherapy may
catalyst to produce chemical changes without being
affect the cells in the intestine that normally secrete lac-
changed itself. The enzymes lactase,maltase,and isoma-
tase,leading to intolerance.
ltase (or sucrase) are needed to break down the disaccha-
The severity of the symptoms depends on the extent
rides; when one or more is inadequate,the result is car-
of the enzyme deficiency, and range from a feeling of
bohydrate intolerance.
mild bloating to severe diarrhea. In the case of a lactase
deficiency,undigested milk sugar remains in the intes-
Types of intolerance
tine, which is then fermented by the bacteria normally
Carbohydrate intolerance can be primary or sec- present in the intestine. These bacteria produce gas,
ondary. Primary deficiency is caused by an enzyme defect cramping,bloating,a “gurgly”feeling in the abdomen,
present at birth or developed over time. The most common and flatulence. In a growing child,the main symptoms
is lactose intolerance. Secondary deficiencies are caused are diarrhea and a failure to gain weight. In an individual
by a disease or disorder of the intestinal tract,and disap- with lactase deficiency,gastrointestinal distress begins
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 649
Carbohydrate
intolerance
and carried by the bloodstream into the lungs where it
KEY TERMS is exhaled. Normally there is very little hydrogen
detectable in the breath,so its presence indicates faulty
Celiac disease—A disease, occurring in both chil- digestion of lactose.
dren and adults, which is caused by a sensitivity to When lactose intolerance is suspected in infants and
gluten, a protein found in grains. It results in young children,many pediatricians recommend simply
chronic inflammation and shrinkage of the lining changing from cow’s milk to soy formula and watching
of the small intestine. for improvement. If needed,a stool sample can be tested
Digestion—The mechanical, chemical, and enzy- for acidity. The inadequate digestion of lactose will result
matic process in which food is converted into the in an increase of acid in the waste matter excreted by the
materials suitable for use by the body. bowels and the presence of glucose.
Enzyme—A substance produced by the body to
assist in a chemical reaction. In carbohydrate Treatment
intolerance, lack of an enzyme makes it impossi-
Carbohydrate intolerance caused by temporary
ble for one type of sugar to be broken down into a
intestinal diseases disappears when the condition is suc-
simpler form so that it can be absorbed by the
cessfully treated. In primary conditions, no treatment
intestines and used by the body.
exists to improve the body’s ability to produce the
Metabolism—All the physical and chemical enzymes,but symptoms can be controlled by diet.
changes that take place within an organism.
Because the degree of lactose intolerance varies so
Nutrient—Food or another substance that supplies much, treatment should be tailored for the individual.
the body with the elements needed for metabolism. Young children showing signs of intolerance should
avoid milk products; infants should switch to soy-based
Sugars—Those carbohydrates having the general
formula. Older children and adults can adjust their intake
composition of one part carbon, two parts hydro-
of lactose depending on how much and what they can
gen, and one part oxygen.
tolerate. For some,a small glass of milk will not cause
problems,while others may be able to handle ice cream
or aged cheeses such as cheddar or Swiss,but not other
dairy products. Generally,small amounts of lactose-con-
about 30 minutes to two hours after eating or drinking
taining foods taken throughout the day are better tolerat-
foods containing lactose. Food intolerances can be con-
ed than a large amount consumed all at once.
fused with food allergies,since the symptoms of nausea,
cramps,bloating,and diarrhea are similar. For those individuals who are sensitive to even very
small amounts of lactose,the lactase enzyme is available
Sugars that aren’t broken down into one of the sim-
without a prescription. It comes in liquid form for use
plest forms cause the body to push fluid into the intestines,
with milk. The addition of a few drops to a quart of milk
which results in watery diarrhea (osmotic diarrhea). Diar-
will reduce the lactose content by 70% after 24 hours in
rhea may sweep other nutrients out of the intestine before
the refrigerator. Heating the milk speeds up the process,
they can be absorbed,causing malnutrition.
and doubling the amount of lactase liquid will result in
milk that is 90% lactose free. Chewable lactase enzyme
tablets are also available. Three to six tablets taken
Diagnosis
before a meal or snack will aid in the digestion of solid
Carbohydrate intolerance can be diagnosed using foods. Lactose-reduced milk and other products are also
oral tolerance tests. The carbohydrate being investigated available in stores. The milk contains the same nutrients
is given by mouth in liquid form and several blood levels as regular milk.
are measured and compared to normal values. This helps
Because dairy products are an important source of
evaluate the individual’s ability to digest the sugar.
calcium,people who reduce or severely limit their intake
To identify lactose intolerance in children and of dairy products may need to consider other ways to
adults,the hydrogen breath test is used to measure the consume an adequate amount of calcium in their diets.
amount of hydrogen in the breath. The patient drinks a
beverage containing lactose and the breath is analyzed
Prognosis
at regular intervals. If undigested lactose in the large
intestine (colon) is fermented by bacteria,various gases With good dietary management, individuals with
are produced. Hydrogen is absorbed from the intestines carbohydrate intolerance can lead normal lives.
650 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ecnarelotni
etardyhobraC
Prevention Anyone who is exposed to CO will become sick,and
the entire body is involved in CO poisoning. A develop-
Since the cause of the enzyme deficiency leading to
ing fetus can also be poisoned if a pregnant woman
carbohydrate intolerance is unknown,there is no way to
breathes CO gas. Infants,people with heart or lung dis-
prevent this condition.
ease,or those with anemia may be more seriously affect-
ed. People such as underground parking garage atten-
Resources
dants who are exposed to car exhausts in a confined area
BOOKS are more likely to be poisoned by CO. Firemen also run a
Macdonald,Ian. “Carbohydrates.”In Modern Nutrition in higher risk of inhaling CO.
Health and Disease,ed. Maurice E. Shils,et al. Philadel-
phia:Lea & Febiger,1994.
Williams,Sue Rodwell. Essentials of Nutrition and Diet Thera-
Causes and symptoms
py.Philadelphia:Mosby,1997.
Normally when a person breathes fresh air into the
PERIODICALS
lungs,the oxygen in the air binds with a molecule called
“If You Think You Can’t Stomach Milk.”Tufts University Diet
hemoglobin (Hb) that is found in red blood cells. This
& Nutrition Letter,13 (Sept. 1995):7.
allows oxygen to be moved from the lungs to every part
“Lactose Intolerance.”Mayo Clinic Health Newsletter,15 (Feb.
1997):7. of the body. When the oxygen/hemoglobin complex
“Most Frequently Asked Questions About Lactose Intoler- reaches a muscle where it is needed, the oxygen is
ance.”Nutrition Today(Mar./Apr. 1996):78-79. released. Because the oxygen binding process is
reversible,hemoglobin can be used over and over again
OTHER
to pick up oxygen and move it throughout the body.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Dis-
ease.<http://www.niddk.nih.gov>. Inhaling carbon monoxide gas interferes with this
oxygen transport system. In the lungs,CO competes with
Karen Ericson,RN oxygen to bind with the hemoglobin molecule. Hemo-
globin prefers CO to oxygen and accepts it more than
200 times more readily than it accepts oxygen. Not only
does the hemoglobin prefer CO, it holds on to the CO
Carbon monoxide poisoning much more tightly,forming a complex called carboxyhe-
moglobin (COHb). As a person breathes CO contaminat-
Definition ed air,more and more oxygen transportation sites on the
hemoglobin molecules become blocked by CO. Gradual-
Carbon monoxide (CO) poisoningoccurs when car-
ly,there are fewer and fewer sites available for oxygen.
bon monoxide gas is inhaled. CO is a colorless,odorless,
All cells need oxygen to live. When they don’t get
highly poisonous gas that is produced by incomplete
enough oxygen, cellular metabolism is disrupted and
combustion. It is found in automobile exhaust fumes,
eventually cells begin to die.
faulty stoves and heating systems, fires, and cigarette
smoke. Other sources include woodburning stoves, The symptoms of CO poisoning and the speed with
kerosene heaters, improperly ventilated water heaters which they appear depend on the concentration of CO in
and gas stoves,and blocked or poorly maintained chim- the air and the rate and efficiency with which a person
ney flues. CO interferes with the ability of the blood to breathes. Heavy smokers can start off with up to 9% of
carry oxygen. The result is headache, nausea, convul- their hemoglobin already bound to CO,which they regu-
sions,and finally deathby asphyxiation. larly inhale in cigarette smoke. This makes them much
more susceptible to environmental CO. The Occupation-
Description al Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has estab-
lished a maximum permissible exposure level of 50 parts
Carbon monoxide, sometimes called coal gas, has
per million (ppm) over eight hours.
been known as a toxic substance since the third century
B.C.It was used for executions and suicides in early Rome. With exposure to 200 ppm for two to three hours,a
Today it is the leading cause of accidental poisoning in the person begins to experience headache,fatigue,nausea,
United States. According to the Journal of the American and dizziness. These symptoms correspond to 15–25%
Medical Association,1,500 Americans die each year from COHb in the blood. When the concentration of COHb
accidental exposure to CO,and another 2,300 from inten- reaches 50% or more,death results in a very short time.
tional exposure (suicide). An additional 10,000 people Emergency room physicians have the most experience
seek medical attention after exposure to CO and recover. diagnosing and treating CO poisoning.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 651
Carbon
monoxide
poisoning
Diagnosis
KEY TERMS
The main reason to suspect CO poisoning is evidence
that fuel is being burned in a confined area,for example a
Carboxyhemoglobin (COHb)—Hemoglobin that
car running inside a closed garage,a charcoal grill burn-
is bound to carbon monoxide instead of oxygen.
ing indoors, or an unvented kerosene heater in a work-
Hemoglobin (Hb)—A molecule that normally shop. Under these circumstances, one or more persons
binds to oxygen in order to carry it to our cells, suffering from the symptoms listed above strongly sug-
where it is required for life. gests CO poisoning. In the absence of some concrete rea-
son to suspect CO poisoning,the disorder is often misdi-
Hypothermia—Development of a subnormal body
agnosed as migraine headache,stroke,psychiatric ill-
temperature.
ness,food poisoning,alcohol poisoning,or heart disease.
pH—A measurement of the acidity or alkalinity of
Concrete confirmation of CO poisoning comes from
a fluid. A neutral fluid, neither acid nor alkali, has
a carboxyhemoglobin test. This blood test measures the
a pH of 7.
amount of CO that is bound to hemoglobin in the body.
Blood is drawn as soon after suspected exposure to CO
as possible.
The symptoms of CO poisoning in order of increas- Other tests that are useful in determining the extent
ing severity include: of CO poisoning include measurement of other arterial
blood gases and pH; a complete blood count; measure-
•headache
ment of other blood components such as sodium,potassi-
•shortness of breath
um,bicarbonate,urea nitrogen,and lactic acid; an elec-
•dizziness trocardiogram (ECG); and a chest x ray.
•fatigue
•mental confusion and difficulty thinking Treatment
•loss of fine hand-eye coordination Immediate treatment for CO poisoning is to remove
•nausea and vomiting the victim from the source of carbon monoxide gas and
get him or her into fresh air. If the victim is not breathing
•rapid heart rate
and has no pulse, cardiopulmonary resuscitation
•hallucinations
(CPR) should be started. Depending on the severity of
•inability to execute voluntary movements accurately the poisoning,100% oxygen may be given with a tight
fitting mask as soon as it is available.
•collapse
•lowered body temperature (hypothermia) Taken with other symptoms of CO poisoning,COHb
levels of over 25% in healthy individuals,over 15% in
•coma
patients with a history of heart or lung disease,and over
•convulsions 10% in pregnant women usually indicate the need for
•seriously low blood pressure hospitalization. In the hospital,fluids and electrolytes are
given to correct any imbalances that have arisen from the
•cardiac and respiratory failure
breakdown of cellular metabolism.
•death
In severe cases of CO poisoning,patients are given
In some cases, the skin, mucous membranes, and
hyperbaric oxygen therapy. This treatment involves plac-
nails of a person with CO poisoning are cherry red or
ing the patient in a chamber breathing 100% oxygen at a
bright pink. Because the color change doesn’t always
pressure of more than one atmosphere (the normal pres-
occur,it is an unreliable symptom to rely on for diagnosis.
sure the atmosphere exerts at sea level). The increased
Although most CO poisoning is acute,or sudden,it is pressure forces more oxygen into the blood. Hyperbaric
possible to suffer from chronic CO poisoning. This condi- facilities are specialized,and are usually available only at
tion exists when a person is exposed to low levels of the gas larger hospitals.
over a period of days to months. Symptoms are often vague
and include (in order of frequency) fatigue, headache,
Prognosis
dizziness,sleep disturbances,cardiac symptoms,apathy,
nausea,and memory disturbances. Little is known about The speed and degree of recovery from CO poison-
chronic CO poisoning,and it is often misdiagnosed. ing depends on the length and duration of exposure to
652 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gninosiop
edixonom
nobraC
the gas. The half-life of CO in normal room air is four to
five hours. This means that,in four to five hours,half of Carcinoembryonic antigen test
the CO bound to hemoglobin will be replaced with oxy-
gen. At normal atmospheric pressures, but breathing Definition
100% oxygen, the half-life for the elimination of CO
The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test is a labo-
from the body is 50-70 minutes. In hyperbaric therapy at
ratory blood study. CEA is a substance which is normally
three atmospheres of pressure,the half-life is reduced to
found only during fetal development,but may reappear
20-25 minutes.
in adults who develop certain types of cancer.
Although the symptoms of CO poisoning may sub-
side in a few hours,some patients show memory prob-
Purpose
lems,fatigue,confusion,and mood changes for two to
four weeks after their exposure to the gas. The CEA test is ordered for patients with known
cancers. The CEA test is most commonly ordered when a
patient has a cancer of the gastrointestinal system. These
Prevention include cancer of the colon, rectum, stomach (gastric
cancer),esophagus,liver,or pancreas. It is also used with
Carbon monoxide poisoning is preventable. Particu-
cancers of the breast,lung,or prostate.
lar care should be paid to situations where fuel is burned
in a confined area. Portable and permanently installed The CEA level in the blood is one of the factors that
carbon monoxide detectors that sound a warning similar doctors consider when determining the prognosis, or
to smoke detectors are available for under $50. Specific most likely outcome of a cancer. In general, a higher
actions that will prevent CO poisoning include: CEA level predicts a more severe disease,one that is less
likely to be curable. But it does not give clear-cut infor-
•stop smoking. Smokers have less tolerance to environ-
mation. The results of a CEA test are usually considered
mental CO
along with other laboratory and/or imaging studies to fol-
•have heating systems and appliances installed by a low the course of the disease.
qualified contractor to assure that they are properly
Once treatment for the cancer has begun,CEA tests
vented and meet local building codes
have a valuable role in monitoring the patient’s progress.
•inspect and properly maintain heating systems,chim- A decreasing CEA level means therapy is effective in
neys,and appliances fighting the cancer. A stable or increasing CEA level may
mean the treatment is not working,and/or that the tumor
•do not use a gas oven or stove to heat the home
is growing. It is important to understand that serial CEA
•do not burn charcoal indoors measurements,which means several done over a period
of time,are the most useful. A single test result is diffi-
•make sure there is good ventilation if using a kerosene
cult to evaluate,but a number of tests,done weeks apart,
heater indoors
shows trends in disease progression or regression.
•do not leave cars or trucks running inside the garage
Certain types of cancer treatments,such as hormone
•keep car windows rolled up when stuck in heavy traffic, therapy for breast cancer,may actually cause the CEA
especially if inside a tunnel level to go up. This elevation does not accurately reflect
the state of the disease. It is sometimes referred to as a
“flare response.”Recognition that a rise in CEA may be
Resources temporary and due to therapy is significant. If this possi-
bility is not taken into account,the patient may be unnec-
ORGANIZATIONS
American Lung Association. 1740 Broadway,New York,NY essarily discouraged. Further,treatment that is actually
10019. (800) 586-4872. <http://www.lungusa.org>. effective may be stopped or changed prematurely.
CEA tests are also used to help detect recurrence of a
OTHER cancer after surgery and/or other treatment has been com-
“Carbon Monoxide Headquarters.”Wayne State University
pleted. A rising CEA level may be the first sign of cancer
School of Medicine.<http://www.phypc.med.wayne.edu/>.
return,and may show up months before other studies or
patient symptoms would raise concern. Unfortunately,this
Tish Davidson
does not always mean the recurrent cancer can be cured.
For example,only a small percentage of patients with col-
Carbunculosis see Boils orectal cancers and rising CEA levels will benefit from
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 653
Carcinoembryonic
antigen
test
another surgical exploration. Those with recurrence in the should come with information regarding the testing facil-
same area as the original cancer,or with a single metastat- ity’s normal range.
ic tumor in the liver or lung,have a chance that surgery
will eliminate the disease. Patients with more widespread
Abnormal results
return of the cancer are generally not treatable with
surgery. The CEA test will not separate the two groups. A single abnormal CEA value may be significant,
but must be regarded cautiously. In general, very high
Patients who are most likely to benefit from non-
CEA levels indicate more serious cancer,with a poorer
standard treatments, such as bone marrow transplants,
chance for cure. But some benign diseases and certain
may be determined on the basis of CEA values, com-
cancer treatments may produce an elevated CEA test.
bined with other test results. CEA levels may be one of
Cigarette smokingwill also cause the CEA level to be
the criteria for determining whether the patient will bene-
abnormally high.
fit from more expensive studies,such as CT scan or MRI.
Resources
Precautions
BOOKS
The CEA test is not a screening test for cancer. It is Cooper,Dennis L. “Tumor Markers.”In Cecil Textbook of
not useful for detecting the presence of cancer. Many Medicine,ed. J. Claude Bennet and Fred Plum. Philadel-
cancers do not produce an increased CEA level. Some phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
noncancerous diseases,such as hepatitis,inflammatory
bowel disease,pancreatitis,and obstructive pulmonary Ellen S. Weber,MSN
disease,may cause an elevated CEA level.
Carcinoid tumors see Neuroendocrine
tumors
Description
Cardiac arrest see Sudden cardiac death
Determination of the CEA level is a laboratory
blood test. Obtaining a specimen of blood for the study Cardiac arrhythmias see Arrhythmias
takes only a few minutes. CEA testing should be covered
by most insurance plans.
Preparation
Cardiac blood pool scan
No preparation is required.
Definition
Aftercare
A cardiac blood pool scan is a non-invasive test that
None. uses a mildly radioactive marker to observe the function-
ing of the left ventricle of the heart.
Risks
Purpose
There are no complications or side effects of this
The left ventricle is the main pump for distributing
test. However,the results of a CEA study should be inter-
blood through the body. A cardiac blood pool scan is
preted with caution. A single test result may not yield
used to determine how efficiently the left ventricle is
clinically useful information. Several studies over a peri-
working. The scan can detect aneurysms of the left ven-
od of months may be needed.
tricle, motion abnormalities caused by damage to the
Another concern is the potential for false positive as
heart wall,cardiac shunts between the left and right ven-
well as false negative results. A false positive result
tricle,and coronary occlusive artery disease.
means the test shows an abnormal value when cancer is
not present. A false negative means the test reveals a nor-
Precautions
mal value when cancer actually is present.
Pregnant women are the only patients who should
not participate in a cardiac blood pool scan. However,the
Normal results
accuracy of the results may be affected if the patient
The absolute numbers which are considered normal moves during imaging, has had other recent nuclear
vary from one laboratory to another. Any results reported scans,or has an irregular heartbeat.
654 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
nacs
loop
doolb
caidraC
Description
KEY TERMS
A cardiac blood pool scan is sometimes called
equilibrium radionuclide angiocardiography or gated
Aneurysm—A sac or bulge that forms because of a
(synchronized) cardiac blood pool imaging. A multi-
weak spot in the wall of an artery or heart chamber.
ple-gated acquisition (MUGA) scanis a variation of
this test. Cardiac shunt—A defect in the wall of the heart
that allows blood from different chambers to mix.
To perform a cardiac blood pool scan, the patient
lies under a special gamma scintillation camera that Coronary occlusive artery disease—Blockage of
detects radiation. A protein tagged with a radioactive the arteries that supply blood to the heart; fre-
marker (usually technetium-99m) is injected into the quently a precursor to a heart attack.
patient’s forearm.
Electrocardiogram (ECG)—A graph that shows the
The camera is synchronized with an electrocardio- electrical charges that trigger the heart to contract.
gram (ECG) to take a picture at specific times in the Heart abnormalities alter the graph, giving clues to
cycle of heart contraction and relaxation. When data the source of the abnormality.
from many sequential pictures is processed by a comput-
Ventricle—One of the two bottom chambers of
er,a doctor can analyze whether the left ventricle is func-
the heart (the heart has four chambers). The left
tioning normally.
ventricle acts as the body’s main pump for blood.
The patient needs to remain silent and motionless
during the test. Sometimes the patient is asked to exer-
cise,then another set of pictures is taken for comparison.
This test normally takes about 30 minutes. Resources
BOOKS
Preparation “Cardiac Blood Pool Imaging.”In Illustrated Guide to Diag-
nostic Tests,ed. J. A. Lewis. Springhouse,PA:Spring-
No changes in diet or medication are necessary. An
house Corp.,1994.
ECG will probably be done before the test.
Pagana,Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis:Mosby,Inc.,1998.
Aftercare
Tish Davidson
The patient may resume normal activities immedi-
ately.
Risks
Cardiac blood pool scans are a safe and effective Cardiac catheterization
way of measuring left ventricle function. The only risk is
to the fetus of a pregnant woman. Definition
Cardiac catheterization (also called heart catheteri-
Normal results zation) is a diagnostic procedure which does a compre-
hensive examination of how the heart and its blood ves-
A computer is used to process the information from
sels function. One or more catheters is inserted through a
the test,then the results are analyzed by a doctor. A nor-
peripheral blood vessel in the arm (antecubital artery or
mally functioning left ventricle will contract symmetri-
vein) or leg (femoral artery or vein) with x-ray guidance.
cally,show even distribution of the radioactively tagged
This procedure gathers information such as adequacy of
protein,and eject about 55–65% of volume of blood it
blood supply through the coronary arteries,blood pres-
holds on each contraction.
sures,blood flow throughout chambers of the heart,col-
lection of blood samples,and x rays of the heart’s ventri-
Abnormal results cles or arteries.
Patients with damage to the ventricle or heart wall A test that can be performed on either side of the
will show an uneven distribution of the radiopharmaceu- heart,cardiac catheterization checks for different func-
tical. The volume of blood ejected in each contraction tions in both the left and right sides. When testing the
will be less than 55%. heart’s right side,tricuspid and pulmonary valve function
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 655
Cardiac
catheterization
are evaluated,in addition to measuring pressures of and coronary arteries,in addition to a large artery in the arm
collecting blood samples from the right atrium,ventricle, or leg. Due to the nature of the test, it is important to
and pulmonary artery. Left-sided heart catheterization is evaluate for the following conditions before considering
performed by way of a catheter through an artery which this procedure:
tests the blood flow of the coronary arteries,function of
•A diagnosis of a bleeding disorder,poor kidney func-
the mitral and aortic valves,and left ventricle.
tion,or debilitation. Any of these pre-existing condi-
tions typically raises the risk of the catheterization pro-
Purpose cedure and may be reason to cancel the procedure.
The primary reason for conducting a cardiac •A diagnosis of heart valve disease. If this is detected,
catheterization is to diagnose and manage persons known antibiotics may be given before the test to prevent
or suspected to have heart disease,a frequently fatal con- inflammation of the membrane which lines the heart
dition that leads to 1.5 million heart attacks annually in (endocarditis).
the United States.
Symptoms and diagnoses that may lead to perform- Description
ing this procedure include:
To understand how a cardiac catheterization is able
•chest pain,characterized by prolonged heavy pressure to diagnose and manage heart disease, the basic work-
or a squeezing pain ings of the heart muscle must also be understood. Just as
the body relies on a constant supply of blood to aid in its
•abnormal treadmill stress test
everyday functions,so does the heart. The heart is made
•myocardial infarction,also known as a heart attack
up of an intricate web of blood vessels (coronary arter-
•congenital heart defects,or heart problems that origi- ies) that ensure an adequate supply of blood rich in oxy-
nated from birth gen and nutrients. It is easy to see how an abnormality in
any of these arteries can be detrimental to the heart’s
•a diagnosis of valvular-heart disease
function. These abnormalities cause the heart’s blood
•a need to measure the heart muscle’s ability to pump
flow to decrease and result in the condition known as
blood
coronary artery diseaseor coronary insufficiency.
Typically performed along with angiography,a tech-
Catheterization is a valuable tool in detecting and
nique of injecting a dye into the vascular system to outline
treating abnormalities of the heart. Through the use of
the heart and blood vessels,a catheterization can aid in the
fluoroscopic (x ray) guidance, a catheter, which may
visualization of any blockages,narrowing,or abnormalities
resemble a balloon-tipped tube, is strung through the
in the coronary arteries. If these signs are visible,the cardi-
veins or arteries into the heart, so the cardiologist can
ologist may assess the patient’s need and readiness for
monitor a body’s various functions at each moment.
coronary bypass surgery, or perhaps a less invasive
Generally a test that lasts two to three hours, a
approach,such as dilation of a narrowed blood vessel either
patient should expect the following prior to and during
surgically or with the use of a balloon (angioplasty).
the catheterization procedure:
When looking at the left side of the heart, fluoro-
•A mild sedative may be given that will allow the patient
scopic guidance also allows the following diagnoses to
to relax but remain conscious during the test.
be assessed:
•An intravenous needle will be inserted in the arm to
•enlargement of the left ventricle
administer medication. Electrodes will be attached to
•ventricular aneurysms (abnormal dilation of a blood
the chest to enable the painless procedure known as an
vessel)
electrocardiograph.
•narrowing of the aortic valve
•Prior to inserting a catheter into an artery or vein in the
•insufficiency of the aortic or mitral valve arm or leg, the incision site will be made numb by
injecting a local anesthetic. When the anesthetic is
•the detour of blood from one side of the heart to the
injected it may feel like a pin-prick followed by a quick
other due to septal defects (also known as shunting)
stinging sensation. Pressure may also be experienced as
the catheter travels through the blood vessel.
Precautions
•After the catheter is guided into the coronary-artery
Cardiac catheterization is categorized as an “inva- system,a dye (also called a radiocontrast material) is
sive”procedure which involves the heart,its valves,and injected to aid in the identification of any abnormalities
656 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitaziretehtac
caidraC
of the heart. During this time,the patient may experi-
ence a hot,flushed feeling or a quickly passing nausea.
Coughing or breathing deeply aids in any discomfort.
•Medication may be given during the procedure if chest
pain is experienced,and nitroglycerin may also be admin-
istered to allow expansion of the heart’s blood vessels.
•When the test is complete,the physician will remove the
catheter and close the skin with several sutures or tape.
Preparation
Prior to the cardiac catheterization procedure,it is
important to relay information to the physician or nurse
regarding allergiesto shellfish (such as shrimp or scal-
lops) which contain iodine,iodine itself,or the dyes that
are commonly used in other diagnostic tests.
Because this procedure is categorized as a surgery,the
patient will be instructed not to eat or drink anything for at
least six hours prior to the test. Just before the test begins,
the patient will urinate and change into a hospital gown,
then lie flat on a padded table that may also be tilted in
order for the heart to be examined from a variety of angles.
Aftercare
While cardiac catheterization may be performed on
an outpatient basis,a patient may require close monitor-
ing following the procedure while remaining in the hos-
pital for at least 24 hours. The patient will be instructed
•the rare occurrence of myocardial infarction (heart
to rest in bed for at least eight hours immediately after
attack) or stroke may also develop due to clotting or
the test. If the catheter was inserted into a vein or artery
plaque rupture of one or more of the coronary or brain
in the leg or groin area,the leg will be kept extended for
arteries.
four to six hours. If a vein or artery in the arm was used
Before left-side catheterization is performed, the
to insert the catheter,the arm will need to remain extend-
anticoagulant medication heparin may be administered.
ed for a minimum of three hours.
This drug helps decrease the risk of the development of a
The patient should expect a hard ridge to form over
blood clot in an artery (thrombosis) and blood clots trav-
the incision site that diminishes as the site heals. Bluish
eling throughout the body (embolization).
discoloration under the skin at the point of insertion
The risks of the catheterization procedure increase
should also be expected but fades in two weeks. It is also
in patients over the age of 60, those who have severe
not uncommon for the incision site to bleed during the
first 24 hours following surgery. If this should happen, heart failure, or persons with serious valvular heart
the patient should apply pressure to the site with a clean
disease.
tissue or cloth for 10–15 minutes.
Normal results
Risks
Normal findings from a cardiac catheterization will
Similar to all surgical procedures, the cardiac
indicate no abnormalities of heart chamber size or con-
catheterization test does involve some risks. Complica-
figuration, wall motion or thickness, the direction of
tions that may occur during the procedure include
blood flow,or motion of the valves. Smooth and regular
•cardiac arrhythmias(an irregular heart beat) outlines on the x ray indicate normal coronary arteries.
•pericardial tamponade (a condition that causes excess An essential part of the catheterization is measuring
pressure in the pericardium which affects the heart due intracardiac pressures, or the pressure in the heart’s
to accumulation of excess fluid) chambers and vessels. Pressure readings that are higher
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 657
Cardiac
catheterization
The catheter
extends from the
groin area to
the heart.
The cardiac catheter runs from the groin to the heart.(Illus-
tration by Argosy Inc.)
KEY TERMS
Aneurysm—An abnormal dilatation of a blood ves- Coronary bypass surgery—A surgical procedure
sel, usually an artery. It can be caused by a congeni- which places a shunt to allow blood to travel from
tal defect or weakness in the vessel’s wall. the aorta to a branch of the coronary artery at a
point past an obstruction.
Angiography—In cardiac catheterization, a picture
of the heart and coronary arteries is seen after Left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD)—
injecting a radiopaque substance (often referred to One of the heart’s coronary artery branches from
as a dye) throughout the veins and arteries. the left main coronary artery which supplies blood
to the left ventricle.
Angioplasty—An alternative to vascular surgery, a
balloon catheter is used to mechanically dilate the Mitral valve—The bicuspid valve which is between
affected area of the artery and enlarge the constrict- the left atrium and left ventricle of the heart.
ed or narrowed segment.
Pulmonary valve—The heart valve which is posi-
Aortic valve—The valve between the heart’s left
tioned between the right ventricle and the opening
ventricle and ascending aorta that prevents regurgi-
into the pulmonary artery.
tation of blood back into the left ventricle.
Shunt—A passageway (or an artificially created pas-
Catheter—A tube made of elastic, elastic web, rub-
sageway) that diverts blood flow from one main
ber, glass, metal, or plastic used to evacuate or inject
route to another.
fluids into the body. In cardiac catheterization, a
long, fine catheter is used for passage through a Tricuspid valve—The right atrioventricular valve of
blood vessel into the chambers of the heart. the heart.
than normal are significant for a patient’s overall diagno- A finding of impaired wall motion is an additional
sis. The pressure readings that are lower,other than those indicator of coronary artery disease, aneurysm, an
which are produced as a result of shock,typically are not enlarged heart,or a congenital heart problem. Using the
significant. findings from an ejection fraction test which measures
wall motion, cardiologists look at an ejection fraction
An ejection fraction,or a comparison of how much
reading under 35% as increasing the risk of complica-
blood is ejected from the heart’s left ventricle during its
tions while also decreasing a successful long term or
contraction phase with a measurement of blood remain-
short term outcome with surgery.
ing at the end of the left ventricle’s relaxation phase,is
also determined by performing a catheterization. The Detecting the difference in pressure above and
cardiologist will look for a normal ejection fraction read- below the heart valve can verify heart valve disease. The
ing of 60–70%. greater narrowing correlates with the higher pressure dif-
ference.
Abnormal results
To confirm septal defects,a catheterization measures
Cardiac catheterization provides valuable still and oxygen content on both the left and right sides of the
motion x-ray pictures of the coronary arteries that help in heart. The right heart pumps unoxygenated blood to the
diagnosing coronary artery disease,poor heart function, lungs,and the left heart pumps blood that contains oxy-
disease of the heart valves,and septal defects (a defect in gen from the lungs to the rest of the body. Right side ele-
the septum,the wall that separates two heart chambers). vated oxygen levels indicate left-to-right atrial or ven-
tricular shunt. A left side that experiences decreased
The most prominent sign of coronary artery disease
oxygen indicates a right-to-left shunt.
is the narrowing or blockage in the coronary arteries,
with narrowing that is greater than 70% considered sig-
nificant. A clear indication for intervention (by angio-
plasty or surgery) is a finding of significant narrowing Resources
of the left main coronary artery and/or blockage or BOOKS
severe narrowing in the high,left anterior descending Bennett,J. Claude,and Fred Plum,eds. Cecil Textbook of Med-
coronary artery. icine.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
658 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitaziretehtac
caidraC
Everything You Need to Know About Medical Tests.Ed.
Michael Shaw,et al. Springhouse,PA:Springhouse Cor-
poration,1996.
Griffith,H. Winter. “Cardiac Catheterization & Angiocardiog-
raphy.”In Complete Guide To Symptoms,Illness and
Surgery.New York:The Berkley Publishing Group,1995.
“Heart.”In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.
35th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton
& Lange,1995.
The Patient’s Guide to Medical Tests.Ed. Barry L. Zaret,et al.
Boston:Houghton Mifflin,1997.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
Beth A. Kapes
Cardiac compression see Cardiac
tamponade
Cardiac conduction disorder see Heart
block
Cardiac mapping see Electrophysiology
study of the heart
Cardiac rehabilitation
Definition
Cardiac rehabilitationis a comprehensive exercise, Description
education,and behavioral modification program designed
Cardiac rehabilitation is overseen by a specialized
to improve the physical and emotional condition of
team of doctors,nurses,and other healthcare profession-
patients with heart disease.
als. Members of the cardiac rehabilitation team may
include a dietician or nutritionist, physical therapist,
Purpose exercise physiologist, psychologist, vocational coun-
selor,occupational therapist,and social worker. The pro-
Heart attack survivors, bypass and angioplasty
gram frequently begins in a hospital setting and contin-
patients,and individuals with angina,congestive heart
ues on an outpatient basis after the patient is discharged
failure,and heart transplants are all candidates for a car-
over a period of six to 12 months.
diac rehabilitation program. Cardiac rehabilitation is pre-
Components of a cardiac rehabilitation program
scribed to control symptoms,improve exercise tolerance,
vary by individual clinical need,and each program will
and improve the overall quality of life in these patients.
be carefully constructed for the patient by his or her reha-
bilitation team.
Precautions
•Exercise. Exercise programs typically start out slowly,
A cardiac rehabilitation program should be imple- with simple range-of-motion arm and leg exercises.
mented and closely monitored by a trained team of Walking and stair climbing soon follow. Blood pressure
healthcare professionals. is carefully monitored before and after exercise ses-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 659
Cardiac
rehabilitation
This 40-year-old male is working out on a treadmill,moni-
tored by his physician,following heart surgery.(Custom
Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
healthcare team, family, and friends to continue the
KEY TERMS lifestyle changes they implemented during the rehabilita-
tion period.
Angina—Chest pain.
Bypass surgery—A surgical procedure that grafts Risks
blood vessels onto arteries to reroute the blood flow
The risks of another heart attack during cardiac reha-
around blockages in the arteries (arteriosclerosis).
bilitation are slight,and greatly reduced by careful,con-
tinuous monitoring of the physical status of the patient.
Normal results
sions, and patients are taught how to measure their
heart rate and evaluate any possible cardiac symptoms The outcome of the cardiac rehabilitation program
during each session. Patients with advanced coronary depends on a number of variables,including patient fol-
disease may require continuous ECG monitoring low-through, type and degree of heart disease, and the
throughout their exercise sessions. Once discharged availability of an adequate support network for the
from the hospital, the patient works with his cardiac patient. Patients who successfully complete the program
team to create an individual exercise plan. will ideally reach an age-appropriate level of physical
•Diet. Cardiac patients will work with a nutritionist or activity and be able to return to the workforce and/or
dietician to develop a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet other daily activities.
plan. Patients with high blood pressure may be put on a
salt-restricted diet and instructed to limit alcohol Resources
intake. Weight loss may also be a goal with obese car-
BOOKS
diac patients.
The American Heart Association. American Heart Association
•Counseling. A psychologist or social worker can help Guide to Heart Attack Treatment,Recovery,and Preven-
cardiac patients with issues that may be contributing to tion.New York:Times Books,1996.
their heart condition,such as stressand anxiety. Relax- DeBakey,Michael E.,and Antonio Gotto Jr. The New Living
Heart.Holbrook,MA:Adams Media Corporation,1997.
ation techniques may be taught to patients to help them
deal with these feelings. Cardiac patients frequently PERIODICALS
experience a period of depression,and group or indi- Harvard Medical School. “Cardiac Rehabilitation.”Harvard
vidual counseling can be beneficial in overcoming Health Letter,7 no. 5 (Jan. 1997):3-7.
these feelings. Vocational counselors can assist cardiac
ORGANIZATIONS
patients in returning to the workforce.
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
•Education. The patient and family should be fully edu- 75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
cated on the physical limitations of the patient,his rec-
ommended diet and exercise plan,his emotional status, Paula Anne Ford-Martin
and the lifestyle changes required to improve the
patient’s overall health.
•Smoking cessation. Cardiac patients who smoke are
twice as likely to have a heart attack in the following
five years than non-smoking patients. These patients Cardiac tamponade
are strongly encouraged to enroll in a smoking cessa-
Definition
tion program,which typically includes patient educa-
tion and behavioral counseling. Nicotine replacement Cardiac tamponade occurs when the heart is
therapy, which uses nicotine patches, nose spray, or squeezed by fluid that collects inside the sac that sur-
gum to wean patients off of cigarettes,may also be part rounds it.
of the program. Antidepressants and anti-anxiety med-
ication may be helpful in some cases.
Description
The heart is surrounded by a sac called the pericardi-
Aftercare
um. When this sac becomes filled with fluid,the liquid
Long-term maintenance is a critical feature of car- presses on the heart,preventing the lower chambers of
diac rehabilitation. Patients require support from their the heart from properly filling with blood.
660 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
edanopmat
caidraC
Because the lower chambers (the ventricles) cannot fill
with the correct amount of blood,less than normal amounts KEY TERMS
of blood reach the lungs and the rest of the body. This con-
dition is very serious and can be fatal if not treated. Pericardiocentesis—A procedure used to drain
fluid out of the sac surrounding the heart. This is
Causes and symptoms done by inserting a needle through the chest and
into the sac.
Fluid can collect inside the pericardium and com-
press the heart when the kidneys do not properly remove
waste from the blood,when the pericardium swells from
unknown causes,from infection,or when the pericardium
allows the fluid to flow out of the sac, relieving the
is damaged by cancer. Blunt or penetrating injury from
abnormal pressure on the heart. This procedure is called
trauma to the chest or heart can also result in cardiac tam-
pericardiocentesis. In severe cases,a tube (catheter) can
ponade when large amounts of blood fill the pericardium.
be inserted into the sac or a section of the sac can be sur-
Tamponade can also occur during heart surgery.
gically cut away to allow for more drainage.
When the heart is compressed by the surrounding
fluid,three conditions occur:a reduced amount of blood Prognosis
is pumped to the body by the heart,the lower chambers
This condition is life-threatening. However, drug
of the ventricles are filled with a less than normal amount
treatments can be helpful, and surgical treatments can
of blood,and higher than normal blood pressures occur
successfully drain the trapped fluid,though it may reac-
inside the heart,caused by the pressure of the fluid push-
cumulate. Some risk of death exists with surgical
ing in on the heart from the outside.
drainage of the accumulated fluid.
When tamponade occurs because of trauma, the
sound of the heart beats can become faint,and the blood
Resources
pressure in the arteries decreases,while the blood pres-
sure in the veins increases. BOOKS
Braunwald,Eugene. “Pericardial Disease.”In Harrison’s Prin-
In cases of tamponade caused by more slowly devel-
ciples of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al.
oping diseases,shortness of breath,a feeling of tight-
New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
ness in the chest,increased blood pressure in the large Shabetai,Ralph. “Diseases of the Pericardium.”In Hurst’s The
veins in the neck (the jugular veins), weight gain, and Heart,ed. Robert C. Schlant,et. al. New York:McGraw
fluid retention by the body can occur. Hill,1994.
ORGANIZATIONS
Diagnosis American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
When cardiac tamponade is suspected,accurate diag- 75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
nosis can be life-saving. The most accurate way to identi-
Dominic De Bellis,PhD
fy this condition is by using a test called an echocardio-
gram. This test uses sound waves to create an image of
Cardiac tumors see Myxoma
the heart and its surrounding sac,making it easy to visual-
ize any fluid that has collected inside the sac. Cardiogenic shock see Shock
Cardiomyopathy see Congestive cardio-
Treatment
myopathy; Restrictive cardiomyopathy
If the abnormal fluid buildup in the pericardial sac is
caused by cancer or kidney disease,drugs used to treat
these conditions can help lessen the amount of fluid col-
lecting inside the sac. Drugs that help maintain normal
blood pressure throughout the body can also help this
condition; however, these drugs are only a temporary Cardiopulmonary
treatment. The fluid within the pericardium must be resuscitation (CPR)
drained out to reduce the pressure on the heart and
restore proper heart pumping. Definition
The fluid inside the pericardium is drained by insert- Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is a procedure
ing a needle through the chest and into the sac itself. This to support and maintain breathing and circulation for a
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 661
Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation
(CPR)
person who has stopped breathing (respiratory arrest) with a type of abnormal heart beat called ventricular
and/or whose heart has stopped (cardiac arrest). fibrillationby as much as 40%. CPR by bystanders may
prolong life during deadly ventricular fibrillation,giving
emergency medical service personnel time to arrive.
Purpose
However, many CPR attempts are not ultimately
CPR is performed to restore and maintain breathing
successful in restoring a person to a good quality of life.
and circulation and to provide oxygen and blood flow to
Often,there is brain damage even if the heart starts beat-
the heart,brain,and other vital organs. CPR should be ing again. CPR is therefore not generally recommended
performed if a person is unconscious and not breathing.
for the chronically or terminally ill or frail elderly. For
Respiratory and cardiac arrest can be caused by allergic
these people,it represents a traumatic and not a peaceful
reactions,an ineffective heartbeat,asphyxiation,breath-
end of life.
ing passages that are blocked,choking,drowning,drug
reactions or overdoses,electric shock,exposure to cold, Each year,CPR helps save thousands of lives in the
severe shock, or trauma. CPR can be performed by United States. More than five million Americans annual-
trained bystanders or healthcare professionals on infants, ly receive training in CPR through American Heart Asso-
children,and adults. It should always be performed by ciation and American Red Cross courses. In addition to
the person on the scene who is most experienced in CPR. courses taught by instructors,the American Heart Asso-
ciation also has an interactive video called Learning Sys-
tem,which is available at more than 500 healthcare insti-
Precautions
tutions. Both organizations teach CPR the same way,but
CPR should never be performed on a healthy person use different terms. These organizations recommend that
because it can cause serious injury to a beating heart by family members or other people who live with people
interfering with normal heartbeats. who are at risk for respiratory or cardiac arrest be trained
in CPR. A hand-held device called a CPR Prompt is
available to walk people trained in CPR through the pro-
Description
cedure, using American Heart Association guidelines.
CPR is part of the emergency cardiac care system CPR has been practiced for more than 40 years.
designed to save lives. Many deaths can be prevented by
prompt recognition of the problem and notification of the Performing CPR
emergency medical system (EMS), followed by early
The basic procedure for CPR is the same for all peo-
CPR, defibrillation (which delivers a brief electric
ple,with a few modifications for infants and children to
shock to the heart in attempt to get the heart to beat nor-
account for their smaller size.
mally),and advanced cardiac life supportmeasures.
CPR must be performed within four to six minutes PERFORMING CPR ON AN ADULT. The first step is to
after cessation of breathing so as to prevent brain damage call the emergency medical system for help by telephon-
or death. It is a two-part procedure that involves rescue ing 911; then to begin CPR,following these steps:
breathing and external chest compressions. To provide
•The rescuer opens a person’s airway by placing the
oxygen to a person’s lungs,the rescuer administers mouth-
head face up,with the forehead tilted back and the chin
to-mouth breaths,then helps circulate blood through the
lifted. The rescuer checks again for breathing (three to
heart to vital organs by external chest compressions.
five seconds),then begins rescue breathing (mouth-to-
Mouth-to-mouth breathing and external chest compression
mouth artificial respiration),pinching the nostrils shut
should be performed together, but if the rescuer is not
while holding the chin in the other hand. The rescuer’s
strong enough to do both,the external chest compressions
mouth is placed against the unconscious person’s
should be done. This is more effective than no resuscita-
mouth with the lips making a tight seal, then gently
tion attempt,as is CPR that is performed “poorly.”
exhales for about one to one and a half seconds. The
When performed by a bystander,CPR is designed to rescuer breaks away for a moment and then repeats.
support and maintain breathing and circulation until The person’s head is repositioned after each mouth-to-
emergency medical personnel arrive and take over. When mouth breath.
performed by healthcare personnel,it is used in conjunc-
•After two breaths,the rescuer checks the unconscious
tion with other basic and advanced life support measures.
person’s pulse by moving the hand that was under the
According to the American Heart Association,early person’s chin to the artery in the neck (carotid artery).
CPR and defibrillation combined with early advanced If the unconscious person has a heartbeat,the rescuer
emergency care can increase survival rates for people continues rescue breathing until help arrives or the per-
662 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
)RPC(
noitaticsuser
yranomlupoidraC
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 663
Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation
(CPR)
Figure A
Figure D
Figure B
Figure E
Figure C
Figure F
CPR in basic life support.Figure A:The victim should be flat on his back and his mouth should be checked for debris.Figure
B:If the victim is unconscious,open airway,lift neck,and tilt head back.Figure C:If victim is not breathing,begin artificial
breathing with four quick full breaths.Figure D:Check for carotid pulse.Figure E:If pulse is absent,begin artificial circula-
tion by depressing sternum.Figure F:Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation of an infant.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
son begins breathing without assistance. If the uncon- The active compression-decompression device was
scious person is breathing,the rescuer turns the person developed to improve blood flow from the heart,but clini-
onto his or her side. cal studies have found no significant difference in survival
between standard and active compression-decompression
•If there is no heartbeat,the rescuer performs chest com-
CPR. Interposed abdominal counterpulsation, which
pressions. The rescuer kneels next to the unconscious
requires two or more rescuers,one compressing the chest
person,placing the heel of one hand in the spot on the
and the other compressing the abdomen,was developed to
lower chest where the two halves of the rib cage come
improve pressure and therefore blood flow. It has been together. The rescuer puts one hand on top of the other
shown in a small study to improve survival but more data
on the person’s chest and interlocks the fingers. The
is needed. A pneumatic vest,which circles the chest of an
arms are straightened,the rescuer’s shoulders are posi-
unconscious person and compresses it,increases pressure
tioned directly above the hands on the unconscious per-
within the chest during external chest compression. The
son’s chest. The hands are pressed down,using only the
vest has been shown to improve survival in a preliminary
palms, so that the person’s breastbone sinks in about
study but more data is necessary for a full assessment.
1.5–2 inches. The rescuer releases pressure without
removing the hands, then repeats about 15 times per
10–15 second intervals. Preparation
•The rescuer tilts the unconscious person’s head and If a person suddenly becomes unconscious,a rescuer
returns to rescue breathing for one or two quick breaths. should call out for help from other bystanders,and then
Then breathing and chest compressions are alternated determine if the unconscious person is responsive by
for one minute before checking for a pulse. If the res- gently shaking the shoulder and shouting a question.
cuer finds signs of a heartbeat and breathing, CPR is Upon receiving no answer, the rescuer should call the
stopped. If the unconscious person is breathing but has emergency medical system. The rescuer should check to
no pulse,the chest compressions are continued. If the see whether the unconscious person is breathing by
unconscious person has a pulse but is not breathing, kneeling near the person’s shoulders,looking at the per-
rescue breathing is continued. son’s chest,and placing a cheek next to the unconscious
•For children over the age of eight,the rescuer performs person’s mouth. The rescuer should look for signs of
CPR exactly as for an adult. breathing in the chest and abdomen,and listen and feel
for signs of breathing through the person’s lips. If no
PERFORMING CPR ON AN INFANT OR CHILD UNDER signs of breathing are present after three to five seconds,
THE AGE OF EIGHT. The procedures outlined above are CPR should be started.
followed with these differences:
•The rescuer administers CPR for one minute,then calls Aftercare
for help.
Emergency medical care is always necessary after
•The rescuer makes a seal around the child’s mouth or
successful CPR. Once a person’s breathing and heartbeat
infant’s nose and mouth to give gentle breaths. The res-
have been restored,the rescuer should make the person
cuer delivers 20 rescue breaths per minute,taking 1.5–2
comfortable and stay there until emergency medical per-
seconds for each breath.
sonnel arrive. The rescuer can continue to reassure the
•Chest compressions are given with only one hand for a person that help is coming and talk positively until pro-
child and with two or three fingers for an infant. The fessionals arrive and take over.
breastbone is depressed only 1–1.5 in (2.5–3.8 cm) for
a child and 0.5–1 in (1.3–2.5 cm) for an infant,and the
Risks
rescuer gives at least 100 chest compressions per
minute. CPR can cause injury to a person’s ribs,liver,lungs,
and heart. However,these risks must be accepted if CPR
is necessary to save the person’s life.
New developments in CPR
Some new ways of performing CPR have been tried.
Normal results
Active compression-decompression resuscitation, ab-
dominal compression done in between chest compres- In many cases,successful CPR results in restoration
sions, and chest compression using a pneumatic vest of consciousness and life. Barring other injuries, a
have all been tested but none are currently recommended revived person usually returns to normal functions within
for routine use. a few hours of being revived.
664 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
)RPC(
noitaticsuser
yranomlupoidraC
Abnormal results
KEY TERMS
These include injuries incurred during CPR and lack
of success with CPR. Possible sites for injuries include a
Cardiac arrest—Temporary or permanent cessa-
person’s ribs,liver,lungs,and heart. Partially successful
tion of the heartbeat.
CPR may result in brain damage. Unsuccessful CPR
results in death. Cardiopulmonary—Relating to the heart and the
lungs.
Resources Defibrillation—A procedure to stop the type of
irregular heart beat called ventricular fibrillation,
BOOKS
usually by using electric shock.
Alton,Thygerson. First Aid and CPR. 4th ed. Sudbury,Massa-
chusetts:Jones & Bartlett Pub,2001. Resuscitation—Bringing a person back to life after
Knoop,Kevin J. and Lawrence B. Stack. Atlas of Emergency an apparent death or in cases of impending death.
Medicine. 2nd ed. New York:McGraw Hill,2001.
Ventricular fibrillation—An irregular heartbeat
National Safety Council. First Aid and CPR for Infants and
where the heart beats very fast but ineffectively. Ven-
Children. 4th ed. Sudbury,Massachusetts:Jones &
tricular fibrillation is fatal if not quickly corrected.
Bartlett Pub,2001.
Skinner,David B. and Richard Vincent. Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation. 2nd ed. New York:Oxford University
Press,1996.
OTHER
PERIODICALS American Heart Association. <http://www.cpr-ecc.org/> and
Davies,N. and D. Gould. “Updating cardiopulmonary resusci- <http://www.americanheart.org/Heart_and_Stroke_A_Z_
tation skills:a study to examine the efficacy of self- Guide/cprs.html>.
instruction on nurses’competence.”Journal of Clinical Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center. <http://cpmcnet.
Nursing9 (2000):400-410. columbia.edu/texts/guide/hmg13_0001.html>.
Eftestol T.,K. Sunde,S. O. Aase,J. H. Husoy,and P. A. Steen. Learn CPR. <http://www.learn-cpr.com>.
“‘Probability of successful defibrillation’as a monitor National Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation. <http://
during CPR in out-of-hospital cardiac arrested patients.” www.nrcpr.org/>.
Resuscitation48 (2001):245-254. University of Washington School of Medicine. <http://depts.
Kern,K. B.,H. R. Halperin,and J. Field. “New guidelines for washington.edu/learncpr/>.
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiac
care:changes in the management of cardiac arrest.”Jour-
L. Fleming Fallon,Jr.,MD,DrPH
nal of the American Medical Association285 (2001):
1267-1269.
Meyer W. and F. Balck. “Resuscitation decision index:a new
approach to decision-making in prehospital CPR.”Resus-
citation48 (2001):255-263.
Cardioversion
ORGANIZATIONS
American College of Emergency Physicians. P.O. Box 619911, Definition
Dallas,TX 75261-9911. (800) 798-1822 or (972) 550-
Cardioversion refers to the process of restoring the
0911. Fax:(972) 580-2816. <info@acep.org>. <http://
heart’s normal rhythm by applying a controlled electric
www.acep.org/>.
shock to the exterior of the chest.
American College of Osteopathic Emergency Physicians. 142
E. Ontario Street,Suite 550,Chicago,IL 60611. (312)
587-3709 or (800) 521-3709. Fax:(312) 587-9951. Purpose
<http://www.acoep.org>.
When the heart beats too fast,blood no longer circu-
American Heart Association,National Center. 7272 Greenville
lates effectively in the body. Cardioversion is used to
Avenue,Dallas,TX 75231. (877) 242-4277. <http://www.
americanheart.org/Heart_and_Stroke_A_Z_Guide/heim. stop this abnormal beating so that the heart can begin
html>. normal rhythm and pump more efficiently.
Heimlich Institute. PO Box 8858,Cincinnati,OH 45208.
<heimlich@iglou.com>. <http://www.heimlichinstitute. Precautions
org/index.htm>.
National Safe Kids Campaign. 1301 Pennsylvania Avenue,Suite
Not all unusual heart rhythms (called arrhythmias)
1000,Washington,DC 20004-1707. <http://pedsccm.wustl. are dangerous or fatal. Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter
edu/All-Net/english/neurpage/protect/drown.htm>. often revert to normal rhythms without the need for car-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 665
Cardioversion
include those instances when the device delivers greater
KEY TERMS or lesser power than expected or when power setting and
control knobs are not set correctly. Unfortunately, in a
Atrial fibrillation—A condition in which the number of cases,the heart prefers its abnormal rhythm
upper chamber of the heart quivers instead of and reverts to it despite cardioversion.
pumping in an organized way.
Atrial flutter—A rapid pulsation of the upper Normal results
chamber of the heart that interferes with normal
Most cardioversions are successful and,at least for a
function.
time,restore the normal heart rhythm.
Ventricular fibrillation—A condition in which the
lower chamber of the heart quivers instead of
Resources
pumping in an organized way.
BOOKS
Ventricular tachycardia—A rapid heart beat, usu-
McGoon,Michael D.,ed. Mayo Clinic Heart Book:The Ulti-
ally over 100 beats per minute.
mate Guide to Heart Health.New York:William Morrow
and Co.,Inc.,1993.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
dioversion. Healthcare providers may also try to correct
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
the heart rhythm with medication or recommend a lifestyle
change before trying cardioversion. However,ventricular
Dorothy Elinor Stonely
tachycardialasting more than 30 seconds and ventricu-
lar fibrillationrequire immediate cardioversion.
Carisoprodol see Muscle relaxants
Carotid artery surgery see Endarterectomy
Description
Carotid Doppler ultrasound see Doppler
Elective cardioversion is usually scheduled ahead of
time. After arriving at the hospital,an intravenous (IV) ultrasonography
catheter will be placed in the arm and oxygen will be
Carotid endarterectomy see Endarterectomy
given through a face mask. A short-acting general anes-
thetic will be administered through the vein. During the
two or three minutes of anesthesia,the doctor will apply
two paddles to the exterior of the chest and administer
the electric shock. It may be necessary to give the shock
two or three times to obtain normal rhythm. Carotid sinus massage
Definition
Preparation
Carotid sinus massage involves rubbing the large
Medication to thin the blood is usually given for at
part of the arterial wall at the point where the common
least three weeks before elective cardioversion. Food
carotid artery, located in the neck, divides into its two
intake should be stopped eight hours before the procedure.
main branches.
Aftercare
Purpose
Medical personnel will monitor the heart rhythm for
Sinus,in this case,means an area in a blood vessel
a few hours,after which the patient is usually sent home.
that is bigger than the rest of the vessel. This is a normal
It is advisable to arrange for transportation home,
dilation of the vessel. Located in the neck just below the
because drowsiness may last several hours. The doctor
angle of the jaw, the carotid sinus sits above the point
may prescribe anti-arrhythmic medication to prevent the
where the carotid artery divides into its two main branch-
abnormal rhythm from returning.
es. Rubbing the carotid sinus stimulates an area in the
artery wall that contains nerve endings. These nerves
Risks
respond to changes in blood pressure and are capable of
Cardioverters have been in use for many years and slowing the heart rate. The response to this simple proce-
the risks are few. Those unlikely risks that remain dure often slows a rapid heart rate (for example, atrial
666 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
egassam
sunis
ditoraC
dias. It has been known to stop the arrhythmia complete-
KEY TERMS ly. If the procedure is being done to help diagnose angi-
napectoris,massaging the carotid sinus may make the
Angina pectoris—Chest pain usually caused by a discomfort go away.
lack of oxygen in the heart muscle.
Resources
Arrhythmia—Any deviation from a normal heart
beat. BOOKS
Atrial fibrillation—A condition in which the McGood,Michael D.,ed. Mayo Clinic Heart Book:The Ulti-
mate Guide to Heart Health.New York:William Morrow
upper chamber of the heart quivers instead of
and Co.,Inc.,1993.
pumping in an organized way.
Atrial flutter—Rapid, inefficient contraction of the Dorothy Elinor Stonely
upper chamber of the heart.
Carotid artery—One of the major arteries supply-
ing blood to the head and neck.
Tachycardia—A rapid heart beat, usually over 100
Carpal tunnel syndrome
beats per minute.
Definition
Carpal tunnel syndrome is a disorder caused by
flutter or atrial tachycardia) and can provide important compression at the wrist of the median nerve supplying
diagnostic information to the physician. the hand,causing numbness and tingling.
Description Description
The patient will be asked to lie down,with the neck
The carpal tunnel is an area in the wrist where the
fully extended and the head turned away from the side
bones and ligaments create a small passageway for the
being massaged. While watching an electrocardiogram
median nerve. The median nerve is responsible for both
monitor,the doctor will gently touch the carotid sinus. If
sensation and movement in the hand, in particular the
there is no change in the heart rate on the monitor, the
thumb and first three fingers. When the median nerve is
pressure is applied more firmly with a gentle rotating
compressed, an individual’s hand will feel as if it has
motion. After massaging one side of the neck,the mas-
“gone to sleep.”
sage will be repeated on the other side. Both sides of the
Women between the ages of 30 and 60 have the
neck are never massaged at the same time.
highest rates of carpal tunnel syndrome. Research has
demonstrated that carpal tunnel syndrome is a very sig-
Preparation
nificant cause of missed work days due to pain. In 1995,
No special preparation is needed for carotid sinus about $270 million was spent on sick days taken for pain
massage. from repetitive motion injuries.
Aftercare Causes and symptoms
No aftercare is required.
Compression of the median nerve in the wrist can
occur during a number of different conditions,particular-
Risks ly those conditions which lead to changes in fluid accu-
mulation throughout the body. Because the area of the
The physician must be sure there is no evidence of
wrist through which the median nerve passes is very nar-
blockage in the carotid artery before performing the pro-
row,any swelling in the area will lead to pressure on the
cedure. Massage in a blocked area might cause a clot to
median nerve. This pressure will ultimately interfere
break loose and cause a stroke.
with the nerve’s ability to function normally. Pregnancy,
obesity, arthritis, certain thyroid conditions, diabetes,
Normal results
and certain pituitary abnormalities all predispose to
Carotid sinus massage will slow the heart rate during carpal tunnel syndrome. Other conditions which increase
episodes of atrial flutter,fibrillation,and some tachycar- the risk for carpal tunnel syndrome include some forms
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 667
Carpal
tunnel
syndrome
ficult to open jars and hold objects with the affected
hand. Eventually,the muscles of the hand served by the
median nerve may begin to grow noticeably smaller
(atrophy), especially the fleshy part of the thumb.
Untreated,carpal tunnel syndrome may eventually result
in permanent weakness,loss of sensation,or even paral-
ysisof the thumb and fingers of the affected hand.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome is made in
part by checking to see whether the patient’s symptoms
can be brought on by holding his or her hand in position
with wrist bent for about a minute. Wrist x rays are often
taken to rule out the possibility of a tumor causing pres-
sure on the median nerve. A physician examining a patient
suspected of having carpal tunnel syndrome will perform a
variety of simple tests to measure muscle strength and sen-
sation in the affected hand and arm. Further testing might
include electromyographic or nerve conduction velocity
testing to determine the exact severity of nerve damage.
These tests involve stimulating the median nerve with
electricity and measuring the resulting speed and strength
of the muscle response, as well as recording speed of
nerve transmission across the carpel tunnel.
Treatment
Carpal tunnel syndrome is initially treated with
splints,which support the wrist and prevent it from flex-
ing inward into the position which exacerbates median
nerve compression. Some people get significant relief by
wearing such splints to sleep at night,while others will
need to wear the splints all day,especially if they are per-
of arthritis and various injuries to the arm and wrist forming jobs which stressthe wrist. Ibuprofen or other
(including fractures,sprains,and dislocations). Further- nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may be pre-
more,activities which cause an individual to repeatedly scribed to decrease pain and swelling. When carpal tun-
bend the wrist inward toward the forearm can predispose nel syndrome is more advanced,injection of steroids into
to carpal tunnel syndrome. Certain jobs which require the wrist to decrease inflammation may be necessary.
repeated strong wrist motions carry a relatively high risk
The most severe cases of carpal tunnel syndrome
of carpal tunnel syndrome. Injuries of this type are
may require surgery to decrease the compression of the
referred to as “repetitive motion”injuries,and are more
median nerve and restore its normal function. Such a
frequent among secretaries doing a lot of typing,people
repair involves cutting that ligament which crosses the
working at computer keyboards or cash registers,factory
wrist, thus allowing the median nerve more room and
workers,and some musicians.
decreasing compression. This surgery is done almost
Symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome include numb- exclusively on an outpatient basis and is often performed
ness,burning,tingling,and a prickly pin-like sensation without the patient having to be made unconscious. Care-
over the palm surface of the hand, and into the thumb, ful injection of numbing medicines (local anesthesia) or
forefinger, middle finger, and half of the ring finger. nerve blocks (the injection of anesthetics directly into the
Some individuals notice a shooting pain which goes from nerve) create sufficient numbness to allow the surgery to
the wrist up the arm,or down into the hand and fingers. be performed painlessly,without the risks associated with
With continued median nerve compression,an individual general anesthesia. Recovery from this type of surgery is
may begin to experience muscle weakness,making it dif- usually quick and without complications.
668 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
lennut
lapraC
Carpal tunnel ligament
Median nerve
Carpal tunnel ligament (severed)
Median nerve
The most severe cases of carpal tunnel syndrome may
require surgery to decrease the compression of the median
nerve and restore its normal function.This procedure
involves severing the ligament that crosses the wrist,thus
allowing the median nerve more room and decreasing com-
pression.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
Seiler,John Gray. “Carpal Tunnel Syndrome:Update on Diag-
KEY TERMS nostic Testing and Treatment Options.”Consultant37 no.
5 (May 1997):1233+.
Carpal tunnel—A passageway in the wrist, created Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
by the bones and ligaments of the wrist, through
which the median nerve passes. Casts see Immobilization
Electromyography—A type of test in which a CAT scan see Computed tomography scans
nerve’s function is tested by stimulating a nerve
Cat-bite infection see Animal bite infections
with electricity, and then measuring the speed and
strength of the corresponding muscle’s response.
Median nerve—A nerve which runs through the
wrist and into the hand. It provides sensation and
some movement to the hand, the thumb, the index Cat-scratch disease
finger, the middle finger, and half of the ring finger.
Definition
Cat-scratch disease is an uncommon infection that
typically results from a cat’s scratch or bite. Most suffer-
Prognosis
ers experience only moderate discomfort and find that
Without treatment,continued pressure on the medi- their symptoms clear up without any lasting harm after a
an nerve puts an individual at risk for permanent disabili- few weeks or months. Professional medical treatment is
ty in the affected hand. Most people are able to control rarely needed.
the symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome with splinting
and anti-inflammatory agents. For those who go on to Description
require surgery,about 95% will have complete cessation
Cat-scratch disease (also called cat-scratch fever) is
of symptoms.
caused by the Bartonella henselae bacterium,which is
found in cats around the world and is transmitted from
Prevention cat to cat by fleas. Researchers have discovered that large
numbers of North American cats carry antibodies for the
Prevention is generally aimed at becoming aware of
disease (meaning that the cats have been infected at some
the repetitive motions which one must make which could
point in their lives). Some parts of North America have
put the wrist into a bent position. People who must work
much higher rates of cat infection than others,however.
long hours at a computer keyboard,for example,may need
Bartonella henselaeis uncommon or absent in cold cli-
to take advantage of recent advances in “ergonomics,”
mates,which fleas have difficulty tolerating,but preva-
which try to position the keyboard and computer compo-
lent in warm,humid places such as Memphis,Tennessee,
nents in a way that increases efficiency and decreases
where antibodies were found in 71% of the cats tested.
stress. Early use of a splint may also be helpful for people
The bacterium,which remains in a cat’s bloodstream for
whose jobs increase the risk of carpal tunnel syndrome.
several months after infection,seems to be harmless to
most cats,and normally an infected cat will not display
Resources
any symptoms. Kittens (cats less than one year old) are
BOOKS more likely than adult cats to be carrying the infection.
Asbury,Arthur K. “Carpal Tunnel Syndrome.”In Harrison’s
Bartonella henselae can infect people who are
Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et
scratched or (more rarely) bitten or licked by a cat. It
al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
cannot be passed from person to person. Although cats
Crouch,Tammy. Carpal Tunnel Syndrome and Repetitive
are popular pets found in about 30% of American house-
Stress Injuries.Berkeley:Frog,1995.
holds, human infection appears to be rare. One study
PERIODICALS
estimated that for every 100,000 Americans there are
Brody,Jane E. “Experts on Carpal Tunnel Syndrome Say that
only 2.5 cases of cat-scratch disease each year (2.5/
Conservative Treatment is the Best First Approach.”The
100,000). It is also unusual for more than one family
New York Times119 (28 Feb.1996):B9+.
member to become ill; a Florida investigation discovered
“Carpal Tunnel Syndrome.”Postgraduate Medicine98 no. 3
multiple cases in only 3.5% of the families studied. Chil-
(Sept. 1995):216.
Glazer,Sarah. “Repetitive Stress Injury:A Modern Malady.” dren and teenagers appear to be the most likely victims
The Washington Post110 (12 Mar. 1996):WH12. of cat-scratch disease,although the possibility exists that
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 669
Cat-scratch
disease
ment of Parinaud’s oculoglandular syndrome occurs when
KEY TERMS Bartonella henselaebacteria pass from a cat’s saliva to its
fur during grooming. Rubbing one’s eyes after handling the
Acetaminophen—A drug for relieving pain and cat then transmits the bacteria to the conjunctiva.
fever.
Diagnosis
AIDS—Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. A
disease that attacks the immune system. A family doctor should be called whenever a cat
Antibiotics—A category of manufactured sub- scratch or bite fails to heal normally or is followed by a
stances used to combat infection. persistent fever or other unusual symptoms such as long-
lasting bone or joint pain. The appearance of painful and
Antibodies—Special substances created by the
swollen lymph nodes is another reason for consulting a
body to combat infection.
doctor. When cat-scratch disease is suspected,the doctor
Bacterium—A tiny organism. Some bacteria cause
will ask about a history of exposure to cats and look for
disease.
evidence of a cat scratch or bite and swollen lymph
Hepatitis—A disease that inflames the liver. nodes. A blood test for Bartonella henselae may be
Immune system—A body system that combats dis- ordered to confirm the doctor’s diagnosis.
ease.
Immunocompromised—Having a damaged immune Treatment
system.
For otherwise healthy people, rest and over-the-
Lymph nodes—Small, kidney-shaped organs that counter medications for reducing fever and discomfort
filter a fluid called lymph. (such as acetaminophen) while waiting for the disease
Pneumonia—A disease that inflames the lungs. to run its course are usually all that is necessary. Antibi-
otics are prescribed in some cases, particularly when
Pus—A thick yellowish or greenish fluid.
complications occur or the lymph nodes remain swollen
and painful for more than two or three months,but there
is no agreement among doctors about when and how they
the disease may be more common among adults than pre- should be used. If a lymph node becomes very swollen
viously thought. and painful,the family doctor may decide to drain it.
Prognosis
Causes and symptoms
Most people recover completely from a bout of cat-
The first sign of cat-scratch disease may be a small
scratch disease. Further attacks are rare.
blister at the site of a scratch or bite three to 10 days after
injury. The blister (which sometimes contains pus) often
looks like an insect bite and is usually found on the hands, Prevention
arms,or head. Within two weeks of the blister’s appear- Certain common-sense precautions can be taken to
ance,lymph nodes near the site of injury become swollen. guard against the disease. Scratches and bites should be
Often the infected person develops a fever or experiences washed immediately with soap and water,and it is never
fatigue or headaches. The symptoms usually disappear a good idea to rub one’s eyes after handling a cat without
within a month, although the lymph nodes may remain first washing one’s hands. Children should be told not to
swollen for several months. Hepatitis, pneumonia, and play with stray cats or make cats angry. Immunocompro-
other dangerous complications can arise,but the likelihood mised people should avoid owning kittens, which are
of cat-scratch disease posing a serious threat to health is more likely than adult cats to be infectious. Because cat-
very small. AIDSpatients and other immunocompromised scratch disease is usually not a life-threatening illness
people face the greatest risk of dangerous complications. and people tend to form strong emotional bonds with
their cats,doctors do not recommend getting rid of a cat
Occasionally,the symptoms of cat-scratch disease take
suspected of carrying the disease.
the form of what is called Parinaud’s oculoglandular syn-
drome. In such cases,a small sore develops on the palpe-
bral conjunctiva (the membrane lining the inner eyelid), Resources
and is often accompanied by conjunctivitis(inflammation
BOOKS
of the membrane) and swollen lymph nodes in front of the Tompkins,Lucy Stuart. “Bartonella Infections,Including Cat-
ear. Researchers suspect that the first step in the develop- Scratch Disease.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal
670 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
hctarcs-taC
Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:
McGraw-Hill,1997. KEY TERMS
PERIODICALS
Smith,David L. “Cat-Scratch Disease and Related Clinical Syn- Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD)—
dromes.”American Family Physician(Apr. 1997):1783+. Degeneration of the macula (the central part of the
retina where the rods and cones are most dense)
Howard Baker that leads to loss of central vision in people over 60.
Cataract—Progressive opacity or clouding of an
Cat-scratch fever see Cat-scratch disease
eye lens, which obstructs the passage of light to
the retina.
Cornea—Clear outer covering of the front of the eye.
Intraocular lens—Lens made of silicone or plastic
placed within the eye; can be corrective.
Cataract surgery
Retina—Innermost layer at the back of the eye,
Definition which contains light receptors, the rods and cones.
Cataract surgery is a procedure performed to remove
a cloudy lens from the eye; usually an intraocular lens is
implanted at the same time. Description
There are two types of cataract surgery:intracapsular
Purpose and extracapsular. Intracapsular surgery is the removal of
The purpose of cataract surgery is to restore clear both the lens and the thin capsule that surround them.
vision. It is indicated when cloudy vision due to This type of surgery was common before 1980,but has
cataractshas progressed to such an extent that it inter- since been displaced by extracapsular surgery. Removal
feres with normal daily activities. of the capsule requires a large incision and doesn’t allow
comfortable intraocular lens implantation. Thus,people
who undergo intracapsular cataract surgery have long
Precautions
recovery periods and have to wear very thick glasses.
Cataract surgery is not performed on both eyes at
Extracapsular cataract surgery is the removal of
once. To avoid risking blindness in both eyes in the
the lens where the capsule is left in place. Each year in
event of infection or other catastrophe,the first eye is
the United States,over a million cataracts are removed
allowed to heal before the cataract is removed from the
this way.
second eye.
There are two methods for extracapsular cataract
The presence of cataracts can mask additional eye
surgery. The usual technique is phacoemulsification. A
problems, such as retinal damage, that neither doctors
tiny incision (about 0.12 in or 3 mm long) is made next
nor patients are aware of prior to surgery. Since such
to the cornea (the eye’s outer covering),and an ultrasonic
conditions will continue to impair sight after cataract
probe is used to break the cataract into minute pieces,
removal if they are not identified and treated,the eventu-
which are then removed by suction. When the lens is too
al outcome of cataract surgery will depend on the out-
hard to be emulsified ultrasonically,the surgeon will use
come of other problems.
a different extracapsular technique requiring a larger
In 1997 and 1998,evidence that cataract surgery can incision. An incision about 0.37 in (9 mm) long is made,
contribute to the progression of age-related macular and the whole lens (without its capsule) is removed
degeneration (ARMD) was published. ARMD is the through the incision. Both kinds of extracapsular extrac-
degeneration of the central part of the retina. According- tion leave the back of the capsule intact,so a silicone or
ly,ARMD patients with cataracts must weigh the risks of plastic intraocular lens can be stably implanted in about
the loss of central vision, within four or five years, the same location as the original lens.
against short-term improvement. When an ARMD
The surgery takes about 30–60 minutes per eye.
patient chooses cataract surgery, the surgeon should
shield the retina against bright light to protect it from
Preparation
possible light-induced damage during surgery and install
an intraocular lens capable of absorbing ultraviolet and Patients must have a pre-operation eye examination,
blue light,which seem to do the most damage. which will include ultrasound analysis to make sure the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 671
Cataract
surgery
retina (the innermost layer of the eye,containing the light include intraocular infection (endophthalmitis),central
receptors) is intact and also to measure eye curvature so retinal inflammation (macular edema), post-operative
that a lens with the proper correction can be implanted. glaucoma,retinal detachment,bleeding under the reti-
The patient will also have a pre-operative physical exam- na (choroidal hemorrhage), and tiny lens fragments in
ination. In addition,patients start a course of antibiotic the back (vitreous) cavity of the eye, all of which can
eye drops or ointment the day before surgery. lead to loss of sight.
Aftercare Normal results
Proper post-operative care is especially important after Ordinarily,patients experience improved visual acu-
cataract surgery. Patients will need someone to drive them ity and improved perception of the vividness of colors,
home after the surgery and should not bend over or do any- leading to increased abilities in many activities,including
thing strenuous for about two weeks. They should refrain reading,needlework,driving,golf,and tennis,for exam-
from rubbing the eye,should wear glasses to protect their ple. In addition,sometimes implanted corrective lenses
eye, and should wear a shield while sleeping so the eye eliminate the need for eyeglasses or contact lenses.
won’t be rubbed or bumped accidentally. The patient will
usually continue their antibiotic for two to three weeks and Resources
will also take anti-inflammatory medication for about the
BOOKS
same length of time. If the patient experiences inflamma-
Salmans,Sandra. Your Eyes:Questions You Have. Answers You
tion,redness,or pain,they should seek immediate medical
Need.Allentown,PA:People’s Medical Society,1996.
treatment to avoid serious complications.
Shulman,Julius. Cataracts.New York:St. Martin’s Press,1995.
ORGANIZATIONS
Risks
American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,P.O.
Cataract surgery itself is quite safe; over 90% of the Box 7424,San Francisco,CA 94120-7424. <http://www.
time,there are no complications. Possible complications eyenet.org>.
672 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yregrus
tcarataC
Cataract surgery in progress.(Photograph by David Sutton/Zuma Images, The Stock Market.Reproduced by permission.)
American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery. 4000 lens,the cortex surrounds the nucleus,and the capsule is
Legato Road,Suite 850,Fairfax,VA 22033-4055. (703) the outer layer. Opacities can occur in any area of the
591-2220. <http://www.ascrs.org>. lens. Cataracts,then,can be classified according to loca-
tion (nuclear,cortical,or posterior subcapular cataracts).
OTHER
“Cataract in Adults:A Patient’s Guide.”National Library of The density and location of the cataract determines the
Medicine Page.<http://text.nlm.nih.gov>. amount of vision affected. If the cataract forms in the area
“Patient Information.”Digital Journal of Ophthalmology. of the lens directly behind the pupil,vision may be signif-
<http://www.djo.harvard.edu/meei/PI/PIhome.html>. icantly impaired. A cataract that occurs on the outer edges
or side of the lens will create less of a visual problem.
Lorraine Lica,PhD
Cataracts in the elderly are so common that they are
thought to be a normal part of the aging process.
Between the ages of 52 and 64,there is a 50% chance of
having a cataract, while at least 70% of those 70 and
Cataracts older are affected. Cataracts associated with aging (senile
or age-related cataracts) most often occur in both eyes,
Definition
with each cataract progressing at a different rate. Initial-
A cataract is a cloudiness or opacity in the normally ly,cataracts may not affect vision. If the cataract remains
transparent crystalline lens of the eye. This cloudiness small or at the periphery of the lens,the visual changes
can cause a decrease in vision and may lead to eventual may be minor.
blindness. Cataracts that occur in people other than the elderly
are much less common. Congenital cataracts occur very
Description rarely in newborns. Genetic defects or an infection or
disease in the mother during pregnancyare among the
The human eye has several parts. The outer layer of
causes of congenital cataracts. Traumatic cataracts may
the eyeball consists of a transparent dome-shaped cornea
develop after a foreign body or trauma injures the lens or
and an opaque,white sclera. The cornea and sclera help
eye. Systemic illnesses,such as diabetes,may result in
protect the eye. The next layer includes the iris,pupil,and
cataracts. Cataracts can also occur secondary to other eye
ciliary body. The iris is the colored part of the eye and the
diseases—for example, an inflammation of the inner
pupil is the small dark round hole in the middle of the iris.
layer of the eye (uveitis) or glaucoma. Such cataracts are
The pupil and iris allow light into the eye. The ciliary body
called complicated cataracts. Toxic cataracts result from
contains muscles that help in the eye’s focusing ability.
chemical toxicity,such as steroid use. Cataracts can also
The lens lies behind the pupil and iris. It is covered by a
result from exposure to the sun’s ultraviolet (UV) rays.
cellophane-like capsule. The lens is normally transparent,
elliptical in shape,and somewhat elastic. This elasticity
allows the lens to focus on both near and far objects. The Causes and symptoms
lens is attached to the ciliary body by fibers (zonules of
Recent studies have been conducted to try to deter-
Zinn). Muscles in the ciliary body act on the zonules,
mine whether diet or the use of vitaminsmight have an
which then change the shape of the lens. This process is
effect on the formation of cataracts in older people. The
called accommodation—the lens focuses images to help
results have been mixed,with some studies finding that
make vision clear. As people age, the lens hardens and
there is a connection and other studies finding none.
changes shape less easily. As a result,the accommodation
Much interest has been focused on the use of antioxidant
process becomes more difficult,making it harder to see
supplements as a protection against cataracts. Antioxidant
things up close. This generally occurs around the age of 40
vitamins such as vitamins A,C,E and beta-carotene help
and continues until about age 65. The condition is called
the body clean-up oxygen-free radicals. Some vitamins
presbyopia. It is a normal condition of aging,generally
are marketed specifically for the eyes. Patients should
resulting in the need for reading glasses.
speak to their doctors about the use of such vitamins.
The lens is made up of approximately 35% protein
Smokingand alcohol intake have been implicated in
and 65% water. As people age,degenerative changes in
cataract formation. Some studies have determined that a
the lens’proteins occur. Changes in the proteins,water
diet high in fat will increase the likelihood of cataract
content,enzymes,and other chemicals are some of the
formation,while an increase in foods rich in antioxidants
reasons for the formation of a cataract.
will reduce the incidence. More research is needed to
The major areas of the lens are the nucleus,the cor- determine if diet,smoking,alcohol consumption,or vita-
tex,and the capsule. The nucleus is in the center of the mins have any connection to the formation of cataracts.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 673
Cataracts
Treatment
For cataracts that cause no symptoms or only minor
visual changes,no treatment may be necessary. Continued
monitoring and assessment of the cataract is needed by an
ophthalmologist or optometrist at scheduled office visits.
Increased strength in prescription eyeglasses or contact
lenses may be helpful. This may be all that is required if
the cataract does not reduce the patient’s quality of life.
Cataract surgery—the only option for patients whose
cataracts interfere with vision to the extent of affecting
their daily lives—is the most frequently performed surgery
in the United States. It generally improves vision in over
90% of patients. Some people have heard that a cataract
should be “ripe”before being removed. A “ripe”or mature
cataract is when the lens is completely opaque. Most
cataracts are removed before they reach that stage. Some-
There are several common symptoms of cataracts: times cataracts need to be removed so that the doctor can
examine the back of the eye more carefully. This is impor-
•gradual,painless onset of blurry,filmy,or fuzzy vision
tant in patients with diseases that may affect the eye. If
•poor central vision cataracts are present in both eyes,only one eye at a time
•frequent changes in eyeglass prescription should be operated on. Healing occurs in the first eye
before the second cataract is removed,sometimes as early
•changes in color vision
as the following week. A final eyeglass prescription is usu-
•increased glare from lights,especially oncoming head- ally given about four to six weeks after surgery. Patients
lights when driving at night will still need reading glasses. The overall health of the
•“second sight”improvement in near vision (no longer patient needs to be considered in making the decision to
needing reading glasses), but a decrease in distance operate. However,age alone need not preclude effective
vision surgical treatment of cataracts. People in their 90s can
have successful return of vision after cataract surgery.
•poor vision in sunlight
Surgery to remove cataracts is generally an outpa-
•presence of a milky whiteness in the pupil as the
tient procedure. A local anesthetic is used and the proce-
cataract progresses.
dure lasts about an hour. Removal of the cloudy lens can
be done by several different procedures. The three types
Diagnosis of cataract surgery available are:
•Extracapsular cataract extraction. This type of cataract
Both ophthalmologists and optometrists may detect
extraction is the most common. The lens and the front
and monitor cataract growth and prescribe prescription
portion of the capsule are removed. The back part of the
lenses for visual deficits. However,only an ophthalmolo-
capsule remains,providing strength to the eye.
gist can perform cataract extraction.
•Intracapsular cataract extraction. The lens and the
Cataracts are easily diagnosed from the reporting of
entire capsule are removed. This method carries an
symptoms,a visual acuity exam using an eye chart,and
increased risk for detachment of the retina and swelling
by examination of the eye itself. Shining a penlight into
after surgery. It is rarely used.
the pupil may reveal opacities or a color change of the
lens even before visual symptoms have developed. An •Phacoemulsification. This type of extracapsular extrac-
instrument called a slit lamp is basically a large micro- tion needs a very small incision,resulting in faster heal-
scope. This lets the doctor examine the front of the eye ing. Ultrasonic vibration is applied to the lens to break
and the lens. The slit lamp helps the doctor determine the it up into very small pieces which are then aspirated out
location of the cataract. of the eye with suction by the ophthalmologist.
Some other diagnostic tests may be used to deter- A replacement lens is usually inserted at the time of
mine if cataracts are present or how well the patient may the surgery. A plastic artificial lens called an intraocular
potentially see after surgery. These include a glare test, lens (IOL) is placed in the remaining posterior lens cap-
potential vision test,and contrast sensitivity test. sule of the eye. When the intracapsular extraction
674 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stcarataC
A dense cataract on lens of eye.(Photograph by Margaret
Cubberly, Phototake NYC.Reproduced by permission.)
method is used, an IOL may be clipped onto the iris.
Contact lenses and cataract glasses (aphakic lenses) are KEY TERMS
prescribed if an IOL was not inserted. A folding IOL is
used when phacoemulsification is performed to accom- Aphakia—Absence of the lens of the eye.
modate the small incision.
Ciliary body—A structure in the eye that contains
Antibiotic drops to prevent infection and steroids to muscles which will affect the focusing of the lens.
reduce inflammation are prescribed after surgery. An eye
Glaucoma—Disease of the eye characterized by
shield or glasses during the day will protect the eye from
increased pressure of the fluid inside the eye.
injury while it heals. During the night,an eye shield is
Untreated, glaucoma can lead to blindness.
worn. The patient returns to the doctor the day after
surgery for assessment,with several follow-up visits over Phacoemulsification—Surgical procedure to
the next two months to monitor the healing process. remove a cataract using sound waves to disinte-
grate the lens which is then removed by suction.
Prognosis Retina—The innermost layer of the eyeball. Images
focused onto the retina are then sent to the brain.
The success rate of cataract extraction is very high,
with a good prognosis. A visual acuity of 20/40 or better Ultraviolet radiation (UV)—Invisible light rays
may be achieved. If an extracapsular cataract extraction which may be responsible for sunburns, skin can-
was performed,a secondary cataract may develop in the cers, and cataract formation.
remaining back portion of the capsule. This can occur one
Uveitis—Inflammation of the uvea. The uvea is a
to two years after surgery. YAG capsulotomy is most often
continuous layer of tissue which consists of the
used for this type of cataract. YAG stands for yttrium alu-
iris, the ciliary body, and the choroid. The uvea
minum garnet,the name of the laser used for this proce-
lies between the retina and sclera.
dure. This is a painless outpatient procedure and requires
no incision. The laser beam makes a small opening in the
remaining back part of the capsule,allowing light through.
In a very small percentage (3–5%) of surgical cataract PERIODICALS
extractions,complications occur. Infections,swelling of “Cataracts.”Well-Connected Health Report 26(31 May 1997).
the cornea (edema),bleeding,retinal detachment,and
ORGANIZATIONS
the onset of glaucoma have been reported. Some problems American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,P.O.
may occur one to two days,or even several weeks,after Box 7424,San Francisco,CA 94120-7424. <http://www.
surgery. Any haziness,redness,decrease in vision,nausea, eyenet.org>.
or painshould be reported to the surgeon immediately. American Optometric Association. 243 North Lindbergh Blvd.,
St. Louis,MO 63141. (314) 991-4100. <http://www.
aoanet.org>.
Prevention
The Lighthouse. 111 East 59th St.,New York,NY 10022.
Preventive measures emphasize protecting the eyes (800) 334-5497. <http://www.lighthouse.org>.
from UV radiation by wearing glasses with a special coating Prevent Blindness America. 500 East Remington Road,
to protect against UV rays. Dark lenses alone are not suffi- Schaumburg,IL 60173. (800) 331-2020. <http://www.
cient. The lenses must protect against UV light (specifically, preventblindness.org>.
UV-A and UV-B). Antioxidants may also provide some pro-
Cynthia L. Frozena,RN
tection by reducing free radicals that can damage lens pro-
teins. A healthy diet rich in sources of antioxidants,includ-
ing citrus fruits,sweet potatoes,carrots,green leafy vegeta-
bles,and/or vitamin supplements may be helpful. When tak-
ing certain medications,such as steroids,more frequent eye
exams may be necessary. Patients should speak to their doc- Catatonia
tors to see if medications may affect their eyes.
Definition
Resources Catatonia is a condition marked by changes in mus-
cle tone or activity associated with a large number of
BOOKS
“Cataract.”In Medical-Surgical Nursing:Concepts and Clini- serious mental and physical illnesses. There are two dis-
cal Practice.5th ed. Ed. Wilma J. Phipps,et al. St. Louis: tinct sets of symptoms that are characteristic of this con-
Mosby-Year Book,Inc.,1995. dition. In catatonic stupor the individual experiences a
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 675
Catatonia
deficit of motor (movement) activity that can render
him/her motionless. Catatonic excitement,or excessive KEY TERMS
movement,is associated with violent behavior directed
toward oneself or others. Barbiturates—A group of medicines that slow
Features of catatonia may also be seen in Neuroleptic breathing and lower the body temperature and
Malignant Syndrome (NMS) which is an uncommon (but blood pressure. They can be habit forming and are
potentially lethal) reaction to some medications used to now used chiefly for anesthesia.
treat major mental illnesses. NMS is considered a medical Benzodiazipines—This group of medicines is used
emergency since 25% of untreated cases result in death. to help reduce anxiety (especially before surgery)
Catatonia can also be present in individuals suffering and to help people sleep.
from a number of other physical and emotional conditions
Electroconvulsive therapy—This type of therapy is
such as drug intoxication,depression,and schizophrenia.
used to treat major depression and severe mental
It is most commonly associated with mood disorders.
illness that does not respond to medications. A
measured dose of electricity is introduced into the
Description brain in order to produce a convulsion. Electro-
convulsive therapy is safe and effective.
In catatonic stupor,motor activity may be reduced to
zero. Individuals avoid bathing and grooming,make little Mutism—The inability or refusal to speak.
or no eye contact with others,may be mute and rigid,and Negativism—Behavior characterized by resis-
initiate no social behaviors. In catatonic excitement the tance, opposition, and refusal to cooperate with
individual is extremely hyperactive although the activity requests, even the most reasonable ones.
seems to have no purpose. Violence toward him/herself
Neuroleptic drugs—Antipsychotic drugs, includ-
or others may also be seen.
ing major tranquilizers, used in the treatment of
NMS is observed as a dangerous side effect associat- psychoses like schizophrenia.
ed with certain neuroleptic (antipsychotic) drugs such as
haloperidol (Haldol). It comes on suddenly and is char-
acterized by stiffening of the muscles,fever,confusion
and heavy sweating. the individual can be made to assume bizarre (and some-
times painful) postures that they will maintain for extended
Catatonia can also be categorized as intrinsic or
periods of time. The individual may become dehydrated and
extrinsic. If the condition has an identifiable cause,it is
malnourished because food and liquids are refused. In
designated as extrinsic. If no cause can be determined
extreme situations such individuals must be fed through a
following physical examination,laboratory testing,and
tube. Catatonic excitement is characterized by hyperactivity
history taking,the illness is considered to be intrinsic.
and violence; the individual may harm him/herself or oth-
ers. On rare occasions,isolationor restraint may be needed
Causes and symptoms to ensure the individual’s safety and the safety of others.
The causes of catatonia are largely unknown
although research indicates that brain structure and func- Diagnosis
tion are altered in this condition. While this and other
Recognition of catatonia is made on the basis of specif-
information point to a physical cause,none has yet been
ic movement symptoms. These include odd ways of walk-
proven. A variety of medical conditions also may lead to
ing such as walking on tiptoes or ritualistic pacing, and
catatonia including head trauma,cerebrovascular disease,
rarely,hopping and skipping. Repetitive odd movements of
encephalitis,and certain metabolic disorders. NMS is an
the fingers or hands, as well as imitating the speech or
adverse side effect of certain antipsychotic drugs. movements of others also may indicate that catatonia is pre-
A variety of symptoms are associated with catatonia. sent. There are no laboratory or other tests that can be used
Among the more common are echopraxia (imitation of to positively diagnose this condition,but medical and neuro-
the gestures of others) and echolalia (parrot-like repeti- logical tests are necessary to rule out underlying lesions or
tion of words spoken by others). Other signs and symp- disorders that may be causing the symptoms observed.
toms include violence directed toward him/herself,the
assumption of inappropriate posture,selective mutism, Treatment
negativism,facial grimaces,and animal-like noises.
Treatment of catatonia includes medications such as
Catatonic stupor is marked by immobility and a behav- benzodiazipines (which are the preferred treatment) and
ior known as cerea flexibilitas(waxy flexibility) in which rarely barbiturates. Antipsychotic drugs may be appropri-
676 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ainotataC
ate in some cases,but often cause catatonia to worsen. Elec- ed. This results in constant or intermittent high blood
troconvulsive therapymay prove beneficial for clients who pressure (hypertension). Episodes of high blood pres-
do not respond to medication. If these approaches are sure may be accompanied by symptoms such as
unsuccessful, treatment will be redirected to attempts to headache,sweating,palpitations,and anxiety. The cat-
control the signs and symptoms of the illness. echolamines test can be ordered, then, to determine if
high blood pressure and other symptoms are related to
Prognosis improper hormone secretion and to identify the type of
tumor causing elevated catecholamine levels.
Catatonia usually responds quickly to medication
interventions.
Description
Prevention The catecholamines test can be performed on either
There is currently no known way to prevent catatonia blood or urine. If performed on blood, the test may
because the cause has not yet been identified. Research require one or two samples,depending on the physician’s
efforts continue to explore possible origins. Avoiding request. The first blood sample will be drawn after the
excessive use of neuroleptic drugs can help minimize the patient has been lying down in a warm, comfortable
risk of developing catatonic-like symptoms. environment for at least 30 minutes. If a second sample is
needed,the patient will be asked to stand for 10 minutes
Resources before the blood is drawn. Instead of a venipuncture,
which can be stressful for the patient,possibly increasing
BOOKS
catecholamine levels in the blood, a plastic or rubber
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders.4th
tube-like device called a catheter may be used to collect
edition. Washington,DC:American Psychiatric Associa-
the blood samples. The catheter would be inserted in a
tion,1994.
Frisch,Noreen Cavan,and Lawrence E. Frisch. Psychiatric Men- vein 24 hours in advance,eliminating the need for needle
tal Health Nursing.Albany,NY:Delmar Publishers,1998. punctures at the time of the test.
It may take up to a week for a lab to complete testing
Donald G. Barstow,RN
of the samples. Because blood levels of catecholamines
commonly go up and down in response to such factors as
temperature,stress,postural change,diet,smoking,obe-
sity,and many drugs,abnormally high blood test results
Catecholamines tests should be confirmed with a 24-hour urine test. In addition,
catecholamine secretion from a tumor may not be steady,
Definition but may occur periodically during the day,and potentially
could be missed when blood testing is used. The urine test
Catecholamines is a collective term for the hormones
provides the laboratory with a specimen that reflects cate-
epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine. Manufac-
cholamine production over an entire 24-hour period. If
tured chiefly by the chromaffin cells of the adrenal
urine is tested,the patient or a healthcare worker must col-
glands,these hormones are involved in readying the body
lect all the urine passed over the 24-hour period.
for the “fight-or-flight”response (also known as the alarm
reaction). When these hormones are released,the heart
beats stronger and faster,blood pressure rises,more blood Preparation
flows to the brain and muscles,the liver releases stores of
It is important that the patient refrain from using cer-
energy as a sugar the body can readily use (glucose),the
tain medications,especially cold or allergy remedies,for
rate of breathing increases and airways widen,and diges-
two weeks before the test. Certain foods—including
tive activity slows. These reactions direct more oxygen
bananas, avocados, cheese, coffee, tea, cocoa, beer,
and fuel to the organs most active in responding to
licorice,citrus fruit,vanilla,and Chianti—must be avoid-
stress—mainly the brain,heart,and skeletal muscles.
ed for 48 hours prior to testing. However,people should
be sure to get adequate amounts of vitamin C before the
Purpose
test,because this vitamin is necessary for catecholamine
Pheochromocytoma (a tumor of the chromaffin formation. The patient should be fasting(nothing to eat
cells of the adrenal gland) and tumors of the nervous sys- or drink) for 10 to 24 hours before the blood test and
tem (neuroblastomas,ganglioneuroblastomas,and gan- should not smoke for 24 hours beforehand. Some labora-
glioneuromas) that affect hormone production can cause tories may call for additional restrictions. As much as
excessive levels of different catecholamines to be secret- possible,the patient should try to avoid excessive physi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 677
Catecholamines
tests
Reference ranges for blood catecholamines
KEY TERMS Supine (lying down): Epinephrine less than 50
pg/mL, norepinephrine less than 410 pg/mL, and
Dopamine—Dopamine is a precursor of epineph- dopamine less than 90 pg/mL. Standing:Values for blood
rine and norepinephrine. specimens taken when the subject is standing are higher
Epinephrine—Epinephrine, also called adrenaline, than the ranges for supine posture for norepinephrine and
is a naturally occurring hormone released by the epinephrine,but not for dopamine.
adrenal glands in response to signals from the sym-
Reference ranges for urine catecholamines
pathetic nervous system. These signals are triggered
by stress, exercise, or by emotions such as fear. Epinephrine 0–20 microgram per 24 hours; norepi-
nephrine 15–80 microgram per 24 hours; dopamine
Ganglioneuroma—A ganglioneuroma is a tumor
65–400 microgram per 24 hours.
composed of mature nerve cells.
Neuroblastoma—Neuroblastoma is a tumor of the
Abnormal results
adrenal glands or sympathetic nervous system.
Neuroblastomas can range from being relatively Depending on the results,high catecholamine levels
harmless to highly malignant. can indicate different conditions and/or causes:
Norepinephrine—Norepinephrine is a hormone •High catecholamine levels can help to verify pheochro-
secreted by certain nerve endings of the sympa- mocytoma,neuroblastoma,or ganglioneuroma. An aid
thetic nervous system, and by the medulla (center) to diagnosis is the fact that an adrenal medullary tumor
of the adrenal glands. Its primary function is to (pheochromocytoma) secretes epinephrine,whereas gan-
help maintain a constant blood pressure by stimu- glioneuroma and neuroblastoma secrete norepinephrine.
lating certain blood vessels to constrict when the •Elevations are possible with,but do not directly confirm,
blood pressure falls below normal. thyroid disorders,low blood sugar (hypoglycemia),or
heart disease.
Pheochromocytoma—A pheochromocytoma is a
tumor that originates from the adrenal gland’s •Electroshock therapy,or shockresulting from hemor-
chromaffin cells, causing overproduction of cate- rhage or exposure to toxins, can raise catecholamine
cholamines, powerful hormones that induce high levels.
blood pressure and other symptoms. •In the patient with normal or low baseline cate-
cholamine levels, failure to show an increase in the
sample taken after standing suggests an autonomic ner-
vous system dysfunction (the division of the nervous
cal exerciseand emotional stress before the test,because
system responsible for the automatic or unconscious
either may alter test results by causing increased secre-
regulation of internal body functioning).
tion of epinephrine and norepinephrine.
Patients collecting their own 24-hour urine samples Resources
will be given a container with special instructions. The
BOOKS
urine samples must be refrigerated. Cahill,Mathew. Handbook of Diagnostic Tests.Springhouse,
PA:Springhouse Corporation,1995.
Risks Jacobs,David S.,et al. Laboratory Test Handbook.4th ed. New
York:Lexi-Comp Inc.,1996.
Risks for the blood test are minimal, but may
Pagana,Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
include slight bleeding from the venipuncture site,faint-
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis:Mosby,Inc.,1998.
ingor feeling lightheaded after blood is drawn,or blood
accumulating under the puncture site (hematoma). There Janis O. Flores
are no risks for the urine test.
Normal results
Reference ranges are laboratory-specific,vary accord- Catheter ablation
ing to methodology of testing,and differ between blood
Definition
and urine samples. If testing is done by the method called
High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC),typi- Catheter ablation of an irregular heartbeat involves
cal values for blood and urine follow. having a tube (a catheter) inserted into the heart through
678 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitalba
retehtaC
which electrical energy is sent to either reset the heart- nique of catheter ablation (meaning tube-guided removal)
beat or stop the heart from beating so a mechanical pace- is used to interrupt the abnormal contractions in the heart,
maker can be put in place. allowing normal heart beating to resume. Atrial fibrilla-
tion and flutterand Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
are two of the most common disorders treated with
Purpose
catheter ablation.
Irregular heartbeats can occur in healthy people
without causing any dangerous symptoms or requiring
Precautions
medical attention. Slight changes in the normal patterns
of heartbeats often reset themselves without notice. The improper correction of abnormal heartbeats can
cause additional arrhythmias and can be fatal. Abnormali-
But when the heartbeat is greatly disrupted—either
ties in different areas of the heart cause different types of
because of traumatic injury, disease, hypertension,
irregular heartbeats; the type of arrhythmia must be clear-
surgery, or reduced blood flow to the heart caused by
ly defined before this procedure can be properly done.
blockages in the blood vessels that nourish the heart—
the condition must be recognized and treated immediate-
ly. Otherwise,it can be fatal. Description
Various drugs can be used to control and help reset Catheter ablation involves delivering highly focused
these abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias). The tech- heat (or radio frequency energy) to specific areas of the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 679
Catheter
ablation
During catheter ablation,a long flexible tube called a catheter is inserted into a vein in the patient’s groin and guided toward
the heart.A special x-ray machine called a fluoroscope helps the electrophysiologist visualize correct placement.(Photo-
graph by Collette Placek.Reproduced by permission.)
Risks
KEY TERMS
Overall,fewer than 5% of people having this proce-
dure experience complications. The most common com-
Fluoroscope—A specialized x-ray machine used
plications are usually related to blood vessel injury when
to visualize the placement of the catheter when
the catheter is inserted and to different heart-related
attempting to correct irregular heartbeats.
problems due to the moving of the catheter within the
Pacemaker—An electrical device that has elec- heart. However,in general,this technique is safe and can
trodes attached to the heart to electrically stimu- control many different heart arrhythmias.
late the heart to beat normally. Pacemakers can be
internal (placed under the skin) or external, with
Normal results
the electrodes placed on the skin or threaded
through a tube placed into the heart. Depending upon the type of irregular heartbeat
being treated,either the normal heartbeat resumes after
treatment or the ability of the heart to beat on its own is
lost,requiring the insertion of a pacemaker to stimulate
heart. Radio frequency energy is very rapidly alternating the heart to beat regularly.
electrical current that is produced at the tip of the
catheter that is placed inside the heart. At the same time
Abnormal results
as the catheter is inserted,a second electrode is placed on
the patient’s skin. When the catheter is energized, the Additional irregular heartbeats can occur as a result
body conducts the energy from the catheter’s tip,through of this procedure,as can damage to the blood vessels that
the heart and to the electrode on the skin’s surface,com- feed the heart. Because this procedure requires the use of
pleting the circuit. the x-ray machine called a fluoroscope,there is exposure
to x-ray radiation,but it’s doubtful that this is harmful in
Although very little electricity is given off by the
adult patients. The risk versus benefit is considered with
catheter,the instrument does generate a large amount of
pediatric patients.
heat. This heat is absorbed by the heart tissue,causing a
small localized burn and destroying the tissue in contact
with the catheter tip; in this way,small regions of heart Resources
tissue are burned in a controlled manner. This controlled
BOOKS
destruction of small sections of heart muscle actually
Scheinman,Melvin M. “Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias
kills the nerve cells causing the irregular heartbeat,stop-
with Catheter Ablative Techniques.”In Hurst’s The Heart,
ping the nerve signals that are passing through this sec- ed. Robert C. Schlant,et al. New York:McGraw Hill,
tion of the heart. This usually causes the irregular heart- 1994.
beat to be reset into a normal heartbeat.
PERIODICALS
Lashus,Andrew G.,Christopher L. Case,and Paul C. Gillette.
Preparation “Catheter Ablation Treatment of Supraventricular Tachy-
cardia-Induced Cardiomyopathy.”Archives of Pediatrics
People can undergo this procedure by having gener-
and Adolescent Medicine151 (Mar. 1997):264.
al anesthesia or by taking medicines to make them Patlak,Margie. “When Heartbeats Go Haywire.”FDA Con-
relaxed and sleepy (sedatives) along with painkillers. sumer31 (Apr. 1997):12.
Once the type of irregular heartbeat is identified and “Radiofrequency Catheter Ablation for Treatment of Cardiac
these medicines are given, the catheter is inserted Arrhythmias.”Medical Letter on Drugs and Therapeutics
through a blood vessel and into the heart. Importantly, 38 (26 Mar. 1996):409.
correct placement of the catheter is visualized by using a
ORGANIZATIONS
specialized type of x-ray machine called a fluoroscope.
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
Aftercare
Dominic De Bellis,PhD
Being sure the patient is comfortable during and
after this procedure is very important. However,because Cat’s cry syndrome see Cri du chat
each person may have a different arrhythmia and possi-
syndrome
bly other medical problems as well,each patient’s needs
must be evaluated individually. CBC see Blood count
680 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitalba
retehtaC
CEA test see Carcinoembryonic antigen test patients with celiac disease are considered at higher risk
for the disorder.
CEB see Chronic fatigue syndrome
Because celiac disease has a hereditary influence,
Cefaclor see Cephalosporins
close relatives (especially first degree relatives,such as
Cefadroxil see Cephalosporins children, siblings, and parents) have a higher risk of
being affected with the condition. The chance that a first
Cefixime see Cephalosporins
degree relative of someone with celiac disease will have
Cefprozil see Cephalosporins the disease is about 10%.
Cefurox see Cephalosporins As more is learned about celiac disease,it becomes
evident that it has many variations which may not pro-
duce typical symptoms. It may even be clinically “silent,”
where no obvious problems related to the disease are
apparent.
Celiac disease
Causes and symptoms
Definition
Celiac disease can run in families and has a genetic
Celiac disease is a disease of the digestive system
basis,although the pattern of inheritance is complicated.
that damages the small intestine and interferes with the
The type of inheritance pattern that celiac disease fol-
absorption of nutrients from food.
lows is called multifactorial (caused by many factors,
both genetic and environmental). Researchers think that
Description several factors must exist in order for the disease to
occur. The patient must have a genetic predisposition to
Celiac disease occurs when the body reacts abnor-
develop the disorder. Then,something in their environ-
mally to gluten,a protein found in wheat,rye,barley,and
ment acts as a stimulus,or “trigger,”to their immune sys-
possibly oats. When someone with celiac disease eats
tem, causing the disease to become active for the first
foods containing gluten, that person’s immune system
time. For conditions with multifactorial inheritance,peo-
causes an inflammatory response in the small intestine,
ple without the genetic predisposition are less likely to
which damages the tissues and results in impaired ability
develop the condition with exposure to the same triggers.
to absorb nutrients from foods. The inflammation and
Or, they may require more exposure to the stimulus
malabsorption create wide-ranging problems in many
before developing the disease than someone with a
systems of the body. Since the body’s own immune sys-
genetic predisposition. Some of the things which may
tem causes the damage,celiac disease is classified as an
provoke a reaction include surgery,especially gastroin-
“autoimmune”disorder. Celiac disease may also be called
testinal surgery; a change to a low fat diet,which has an
sprue, nontropical sprue, gluten sensitive enteropathy,
increased number of wheat-based foods; pregnancy;
celiac sprue,and adult celiac disease.
childbirth; severe emotional stress; or a viral infection.
Celiac disease may be discovered at any age,from This combination of genetic susceptibility and an outside
infancy through adulthood. The disorder is more com- agent leads to celiac disease.
monly found among white Europeans or in people of
Each person with celiac disease is affected different-
European descent. It is very unusual to find celiac dis-
ly. When food containing gluten reaches the small intes-
ease in African or Asian people. The exact incidence of
tine, the immune system begins to attack a substance
the disease is uncertain. Estimates vary from one in
called gliadin,which is found in the gluten. The resulting
5000, to as many as one in every 300 individuals with
inflammation causes damage to the delicate finger-like
this background. The prevalence of celiac disease seems
structures in the intestine,called villi,where food absorp-
to be different from one European country to another,
tion actually takes place. The patient may experience a
and between Europe and the United States. This may be
number of symptoms related to the inflammation and the
due to differences in diet and/or unrecognized disease. A
chemicals it releases,and/or the lack of ability to absorb
recent study of random blood samples tested for celiac
nutrients from food,which can cause malnutrition.
disease in the US showed one in 250 testing positive. It is
clearly underdiagnosed,probably due to the symptoms The most commonly recognized symptoms of celiac
being attributed to another problem, or lack of knowl- disease relate to the improper absorption of food in the
edge about celiac disease by physicians and laboratories. gastrointestinal system. Many patients with gastrointesti-
Because of the known genetic component, relatives of nal symptoms will have diarrhea and fatty, greasy,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 681
Celiac
disease
unusually foul-smelling stools. The patient may com- include those with juvenile chronic arthritis,some thy-
plain of excessive gas (flatulence),distended abdomen, roid diseases,and IgA deficiency.
weight loss, and generalized weakness. Not all people
There is an increased risk of intestinal lymphoma,a
have digestive system complications; some people only
type of cancer,in individuals with celiac disease. Suc-
have irritability or depression. Irritability is one of the
cessful treatment of the celiac disease seems to decrease
most common symptoms in children with celiac disease.
the chance of developing lymphoma.
Not all patients have these problems. Unrecognized
and therefore untreated celiac disease may cause or con-
Diagnosis
tribute to a variety of other conditions. The decreased
ability to digest,absorb,and utilize food properly (mal- Because of the variety of ways celiac disease can
absorption) may cause anemia (low red blood count) manifest itself, it is often not discovered promptly. Its
from iron deficiency or easy bruising from a lack of vita- symptoms are similar to many other conditions including
min K. Poor mineral absorption may result in osteoporo- irritible bowel syndrome,Crohn’s disease,ulcerative
sis,or “brittle bones,”which may lead to bone fractures. colitis, diverticulosis, intestinal infections, chronic
Vitamin D levels may be insufficient and bring about a fatigue syndrome,and depression. The condition may
“softening” of bones (osteomalacia), which produces persist without diagnosis for so long that the patient
painand bony deformities,such as flattening or bending. accepts a general feeling of illness as normal. This leads
Defects in the tooth enamel,characteristic of celiac dis- to further delay in identifying and treating the disorder. It
ease,may be recognized by dentists. Celiac disease may is not unusual for the disease to be identified in the
be discovered during medical tests performed to investi- course of medical investigations for seemingly unrelated
gate failure to thrivein infants,or lack of proper growth problems. For example,celiac disease has been discov-
in children and adolescents. People with celiac disease ered during testing to find the cause of infertility.
may also experience lactose intolerance because they
If celiac disease is suspected, a blood test can be
don’t produce enough of the enzyme lactase, which
ordered. This test looks for the antibodies to gluten (called
breaks down the sugar in milk into a form the body can
antigliadin,anti-endomysium,and antireticulin) that the
absorb. Other symptoms can include muscle cramps,
immune system produces in celiac disease. Antibodies are
fatigue,delayed growth,tingling or numbness in the legs
chemicals produced by the immune system in response to
(from nerve damage), pale sores in the mouth (called
substances that the body perceives to be threatening. Some
aphthus ulcers),tooth discoloration,or missed menstrual
experts advocate not just evaluating patients with symp-
periods (due to severe weight loss).
toms,but using these blood studies as a screening test for
A distinctive, painful skin rash, called dermatitis high-risk individuals,such as those with relatives (espe-
herpetiformis, may be the first sign of celiac disease. cially first degree relatives) known to have the disorder. An
Approximately 10% of patients with celiac disease have abnormal result points towards celiac disease,but further
this rash,but it is estimated that 85% or more of patients tests are needed to confirm the diagnosis. Because celiac
with the rash have the disease. disease affects the ability of the body to absorb nutrients
Many disorders are associated with celiac disease, from food,several tests may be ordered to look for nutri-
though the nature of the connection is unclear. One type tional deficiencies. For example,doctors may order a test
of epilepsy is linked to celiac disease. Once their celiac of iron levels in the blood because low levels of iron (ane-
disease is successfully treated,a significant number of mia) may accompany celiac disease. Doctors may also
these patients have fewer or no seizures. Patients with order a test for fat in the stool,since celiac disease pre-
alopecia areata, a condition where hair loss occurs in vents the body from absorbing fat from food.
sharply defined areas,have been shown to have a higher
If these tests above are suspicious for celiac disease,
risk of celiac disease than the general population. There
the next step is a biopsy (removal of a tiny piece of tissue
appears to be a higher percentage of celiac disease
surgically) of the small intestine. This is usually done by a
among people with Down syndrome, but the link
gastroenterologist,a physician who specializes in diagnos-
between the conditions is unknown.
ing and treating bowel disorders. It is generally performed
Several conditions attributed to a disorder of the in the office,or in a hospital’s outpatient department. The
immune system have been associated with celiac disease. patient remains awake, but is sedated. A narrow tube,
People with insulin dependent diabetes (type I) have a called an endoscope,is passed through the mouth,down
much higher incidence of celiac disease. One source esti- through the stomach,and into the small intestine. A small
mates that as many as one in 20 insulin-dependent dia- sample of tissue is taken and sent to the laboratory for
betics may have celiac disease. Patients with other condi- analysis. If it shows a pattern of tissue damage characteris-
tions where celiac disease may be more commonly found tic of celiac disease,the diagnosis is established.
682 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
caileC
The patient is then placed on a gluten-free diet
(GFD). The physician will periodically recheck the level KEY TERMS
of antibody in the patient’s blood. After several months,
the small intestine is biopsied again. If the diagnosis of Antibodies—Proteins that provoke the immune
celiac disease was correct (and the patient followed the system to attack particular substances. In celiac
rigorous diet),healing of the intestine will be apparent. disease, the immune system makes antibodies to a
Most experts agree that it is necessary to follow these component of gluten.
steps in order to be sure of an accurate diagnosis.
Gluten—A protein found in wheat, rye, barley,
and oats.
Treatment
Villi—Tiny, finger-like projections that enable the
The only treatment for celiac disease is a gluten-free small intestine to absorb nutrients from food.
diet. This may be easy for the doctor to prescribe,but dif-
ficult for the patient to follow. For most people,adhering
to this diet will stop symptoms and prevent damage to the
intestines. Damaged villi can be functional again in three
Prognosis
to six months. This diet must be followed for life. For
people whose symptoms are cured by the gluten-free diet, Patients with celiac disease must adhere to a strict
this is further evidence that their diagnosis is correct. GFD throughout their lifetime. Once the diet has been
followed for several years, individuals with celiac dis-
Gluten is present in any product that contains wheat,
ease have similar mortality rates as the general popula-
rye,barley,or oats. It helps make bread rise,and gives
tion. However,about 10% of people with celiac disease
many foods a smooth,pleasing texture. In addition to the
develop a cancer involving the gastrointestinal tract (both
many obvious places gluten can be found in a normal
carcinoma and lymphoma).
diet,such as breads,cereals,and pasta,there are many
hidden sources of gluten. These include ingredients There are a small number of patients who develop a
added to foods to improve texture or enhance flavor and refractory type of celiac disease, where the GFD no
products used in food packaging. Gluten may even be longer seems effective. Once the diet has been thorough-
present on surfaces used for food preparation or cooking. ly assessed to ensure no hidden sources of gluten are
causing the problem, medications may be prescribed.
Fresh foods that have not been artificially processed,
such as fruits, vegetables, and meats, are permitted as Steroids or immunosuppressant drugsare often used to
try to control the disease. It is unclear whether these
part of a GFD. Gluten-free foods can be found in health
efforts meet with much success.
food stores and in some supermarkets. Mail-order food
companies often have a selection of gluten-free products.
Help in dietary planning is available from dieticians
Prevention
(healthcare professionals specializing in food and nutri-
tion) or from support groups for individuals with celiac There is no way to prevent celiac disease. However,
disease. There are many cookbooks on the market specif- the key to decreasing its impact on overall health is early
ically for those on a GFD. diagnosis and strict adherence to the prescribed gluten-
Treating celiac disease with a GFD is almost always free diet.
completely effective. Gastrointestinal complaints and
other symptoms are alleviated. Secondary complications,
Resources
such as anemia and osteoporosis, resolve in almost all
patients. People who have experienced lactose intoler- BOOKS
ance related to their celiac disease usually see those Lowell,Jax Peters. Against the Grain:The Slightly Eccentric
symptoms subside,as well. Although there is no risk and Guide to Living Well without Wheat or Gluten.New York:
much potential benefit to this treatment,it is clear that Henry Holt,1996.
avoiding all foods containing gluten can be difficult.
PERIODICALS
Experts emphasize the need for lifelong adherence to
Gluten-Free Living(bimonthly newsletter) PO Box 105,Hast-
the GFD to avoid the long-term complications of this dis-
ings-on-Hudson,NY 10706.
order. They point out that although the disease may have
Guest,Jean. “Wheat’s Your Problem?”Diabetes Forecast49
symptom-free periods if the diet is not followed, silent (August 1996):44–51.
damage continues to occur. Celiac disease cannot be “out- Pruessner,H. “Detecting Celiac Disease in Your Patients.”
grown”or cured,according to medical authorities. American Family Physician57 (March 1998):1023–34.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 683
Celiac
disease
ORGANIZATIONS Orbital cellulitis
American Celiac Society. 58 Musano Court,West Orange,NJ,
A very serious infection, called orbital cellulitis,
7052. (201) 325-8837.
occurs when bacteria enter and infect the tissues sur-
Celiac Disease Foundation. 13251 Ventura Blvd.,Suite 1,Stu-
rounding the eye. In 50–70% of all cases of orbital cel-
dio City,CA 91604-1838. (818) 990-2354.
Celiac Sprue Association/United States of America (CSA/ lulitis,the infection spreads to the eye(s) from the sinus-
USA). PO Box 31700,Omaha,NE 68131-0700. (402) es or the upper respiratory tract (nose and throat). Twen-
558-0600. ty-five percent of orbital infections occur after surgery on
Gluten Intolerance Group. PO Box 23053,Seattle,WA,98102- the face. Other sources of orbital infection include a
0353. (206) 325-6980. direct infection from an eye injury, from a dental or
National Center for Nutrition and Dietetics. American Dietetic throat infection,and through the bloodstream.
Association,216 West Jackson Boulevard,Suite 800,
Chicago,IL,60606-6995. (800) 366-1655. Infection of the tissues surrounding the eye causes
redness,swollen eyelids,severe pain,and causes the eye
OTHER
to bulge out. This serious infection can lead to a tempo-
National Institute of Diabetes & Digestive & Kidney Diseases.
rary loss of vision,blindness,brain abscesses,inflamma-
<http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health/digest/pubs/celiac/
tion of the brain and spinal tissues (meningitis), and
index.htm>.
other complications. Before the discovery of antibiotics,
orbital cellulitis caused blindness in 20% of patients and
Amy Vance,MS,CGC
deathin 17% of patients. Antibiotic treatment has signif-
icantly reduced the incidence of blindness and death.
Cellulitis Causes and symptoms
Definition Although other kinds of bacteria can cause cellulitis,
it is most often caused by Streptococcus pyogenes(the
Cellulitis is a spreading bacterial infection just
bacteria which causes strep throat) and Staphylococcus
below the skin surface. It is most commonly caused by
aureus. Streptococcus pyogenesis the so-called “flesh-
Streptococcus pyogenesor Staphylococcus aureus.
eating bacteria”and,in rare cases,can cause a danger-
ous, deep skin infection called necrotizing fasciitis.
Description Orbital cellulitis may be caused by bacteria which cannot
grow in the presence of oxygen (anaerobic bacteria). In
The word “cellulitis”actually means “inflammation
children, Haemophilus influenzae type B frequently
of the cells.”Specifically,cellulitis refers to an infection
causes orbital cellulitis following a sinus infection.
of the tissue just below the skin surface. In humans,the
skin and the tissues under the skin are the most common Streptococcus pyogenes can be picked up from a
locations for microbial infection. Skin is the first defense person who has strep throat or an infected sore. Other
against invading bacteria and other microbes. An infec- cellulitis-causing bacteria can be acquired from direct
tion can occur when this normally strong barrier is dam- contact with infected sores. Persons who are at a higher
aged due to surgery,injury,or a burn. Even something as risk for cellulitis are those who have a severe underlying
small as a scratch or an insect bite allows bacteria to enter disease (such as cancer,diabetes,and kidney disease),
the skin, which may lead to an infection. Usually, the are taking steroid medications,have a reduced immune
immune system kills any invading bacteria, but some- system (because of AIDS,organ transplant,etc.),have
times the bacteria are able to grow and cause an infection. been burned,have insect bites,have reduced blood circu-
lation to limbs,or have had a leg vein removed for coro-
Once past the skin surface,the warmth,moisture,and
nary bypass surgery. In addition,chicken pox,human or
nutrients allow bacteria to grow rapidly. Disease-causing
animal bite wounds, skin wounds, and recent surgery
bacteria release proteins called enzymes which cause tis-
can put a person at a higher risk for cellulitis.
sue damage. The body’s reaction to damage is inflamma-
tion which is characterized by pain, redness, heat, and The characteristic symptoms of cellulitis are red-
swelling. This red, painful region grows bigger as the ness, warmth, pain, and swelling. The infected area
infection and resulting tissue damage spread. An untreat- appears as a red patch that gets larger rapidly within the
ed infection may spread to the lymphatic system (acute first 24 hours. A thick red line which progresses towards
lymphangitis), the lymph nodes (lymphadenitis), the the heart may appear indicating an infection of the lymph
bloodstream (bacteremia),or into deeper tissues. Celluli- vessels (lymphangitis). Other symptoms which may
tis most often occurs on the face,neck,and legs. occur include fever,chills,tiredness,muscle aches,and a
684 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitilulleC
general ill feeling. Some people also experience nausea,
vomiting,stiff joints,and hair loss at the infection site.
The characteristic symptoms of orbital cellulitis are
eye pain,redness,swelling,warmth,and tenderness. The
eye may bulge out and it may be difficult or impossible
to move. Temporary loss of vision,pus drainage from the
eye,chills,fever,headaches,vomiting,and a general ill
feeling may occur.
Diagnosis
Cellulitis may be diagnosed and treated by a family
doctor,an infectious disease specialist,a doctor who spe-
cializes in skin diseases (dermatologist),or in the case of
orbital cellulitis, an eye doctor (ophthalmologist). The
diagnosis of cellulitis is based mainly on the patient’s
symptoms. The patient’s recent medical history is also
used in the diagnosis.
Laboratory tests may be done to determine which
kind of bacteria is causing the infection but these tests A normally healthy person is usually not hospital-
are not always successful. If the skin injury is visible,a ized for mild or moderate cellulitis. General treatment
sterile cotton swab is used to pick up a sample from the measures include elevation of the infected area,rest,and
wound. If there is no obvious skin injury,a needle may application of warm, moist compresses to the infected
be used to inject a small amount of sterile salt solution area. The doctor will want to see the patient again to
into the infected skin,and then the solution is withdrawn. make sure that the antibiotic treatment is effective in
The salt solution should pick up some of the bacteria stopping the infection.
causing the infection. A blood sample may be taken from
Persons at high risk for severe cellulitis will proba-
the patient’s arm to see if bacteria have entered the
bly be hospitalized for treatment and monitoring. Antibi-
bloodstream. Also,a blood test may be done to count the
otics may be given intravenously to patients with severe
number of white blood cells in the blood. High numbers
cellulitis. Complications such as deep infection,or bone
of white blood cells suggest that the body is trying to
or joint infections,might require surgical drainage and a
fight a bacterial infection.
longer course of antibiotic treatment. Extensive tissue
For orbital cellulitis,the doctor may often perform a
destruction may require plastic surgery to repair. In cases
special x-ray scan called computed tomography scan of orbital cellulitis caused by a sinus infection,surgery
(CT). This scan enables the doctor to see the patient’s
may be required to drain the sinuses.
head in cross-section to determine exactly where the
infection is and see if any damage has occurred. A CT
scan takes about 20 minutes. Prognosis
Over 90% of all cellulitis cases are cured after seven to
Treatment 10 days of antibiotic treatment. Persons with serious dis-
ease and/or those who are taking immunosuppressive drugs
Antibiotic treatment is the only way to battle this
may experience a more severe form of cellulitis which can
potentially life-threatening infection. Mild to moderate
be life threatening. Serious complications include blood
cellulitis can be treated with the following antibiotics
poisoning(bacteria growing in the blood stream),meningi-
taken every four to eight hours by mouth:
tis (brain and spinal cord infection),tissue death (necrosis),
•penicillins (Bicillin,Wycillin,Pen Vee,V-Cillin) and/or lymphangitis (infection of the lymph vessels).
•erythromycin (E-Mycin,Ery-Tab) Severe cellulitis caused by Streptococcus pyogenes can
lead to destructive and life-threatening necrotizing fasciitis.
•cephalexin (Biocef,Keflex)
•cloxacillin (Tegopen)
Prevention
Other medications may be recommended, such as
acetaminophen(Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Motrin,Advil) Cellulitis may be prevented by wearing appropriate
to relieve pain,and aspirinto decrease fever. protective equipment during work and sports to avoid
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 685
Cellulitis
This person’s lower leg is swollen and inflamed due to cel-
lulitis.Cellulitis is a Streptococcus bacterial infection of the
skin and the tissues beneath it.The face,neck,or legs are
common sites of cellulitis.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.
Reproduced by permission.)
rological disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease,
KEY TERMS Parkinson’s disease, and epilepsy. Further uses have
shown positive results in the treatment of a wide range of
Inflammation—A local, protective response to tis- chronic conditions such as arteriosclerosis, congenital
sue injury. It is characterized by redness, warmth, defects, and sexual dysfunction. The therapy has also
swelling, and pain. been used to treat cancerpatients at a number of clinics
in Tijuana, Mexico, although this application has not
Necrotizing fasciitis—A destructive infection
been well supported with controlled clinical studies.
which follows severe cellulitis and involves the
deep skin and underlying tissues.
Description
Sinuses—Air cavities found in the bones of the
Origins
head. The sinuses which are connected to the nose
are prone to infection. The theory behind cell therapy has been in existence
for several hundred years. The first recorded discussion of
the concept of cell therapy can be traced to Phillippus
Aureolus Paracelsus (1493–1541),a German-Swiss physi-
skin injury,cleaning cuts and skin injuries with antiseptic cian and alchemist who wrote in his Der grossen Wun-
soap, keeping wounds clean and protected, watching dartzney(“Great Surgery Book”) in 1536 that “the heart
wounds for signs of infection, taking the entire pre- heals the heart,lung heals the lung,spleen heals the spleen;
scribed dose of antibiotic,and maintaining good general like cures like.”Paracelsus and many of his contemporaries
health. Persons with diabetes should try to maintain good agreed that the best way to treat an illness was to use living
blood sugar control. tissue to restore the ailing. In 1667,at a laboratory in the
palace of Louis XIV, Jean-Baptiste Denis (1640–1704)
Resources attempted to transfuse blood from a calf into a mentally ill
patient—and since blood transfusionis,in effect,a form
BOOKS
of cell therapy,this could be the first documented case of
Dermatology.3rd ed. Ed. Peter J. Lynch. Baltimore:Williams
this procedure. However,the first recorded attempt at non-
and Wilkins,1994.
Westfall,Christopher T.,John W. Shore,and Ann Sullivan blood cellular therapy occurred in 1912 when German
Baker. “Orbital Infections.”In Infectious Diseases.2nd physicians attempted to treat children with hypothy-
ed. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1998. roidism,or an underactive thyroid,with thyroid cells.
PERIODICALS In 1931, Dr. Paul Niehans (1882–1971), a Swiss
Lewis,Ronald T. “Soft Tissue Infections.”World Journal of physician,became known as “the father of cell therapy”
Surgery22,no. 2 (Feb. 1998):146-51. quite by chance. After a surgical accident by a colleague,
Niehans attempted to transplant a patient’s severely dam-
OTHER
aged parathyroid glands with those of a steer. When the
Mayo Clinic Online.5 Mar. 1998 <http://www.mayohealth.org>.
patient began to rapidly deteriorate before the transplant
Belinda Rowland,PhD could take place, Niehans decided to dice the steer’s
parathyroid gland into fine pieces, mix the pieces in a
saline solution, and inject them into the dying patient.
Immediately,the patient began to improve and,in fact,
lived for another 30 years.
Cell therapy
Cell therapy is,in effect,a type of organ transplant
which has also been referred to as “live cell therapy,”
Definition “xenotransplant therapy,”“cellular suspensions,”“glan-
dular therapy,” or “fresh cell therapy.” The procedure
Cell therapy is the transplantation of human or ani-
involves the injection of either whole fetal xenogenic
mal cells to replace or repair damaged tissue and/or cells.
(animal) cells (e.g.,from sheep,cows,pigs,and sharks)
or cell extracts from human tissue. The latter is known as
Purpose autologous cell therapy if the cells are extracted from and
transplanted back into the same patient. Several different
Cell therapy has been used successfully to rebuild
types of cells can be administered simultaneously.
damaged cartilage in joints,repair spinal cord injuries,
strengthen a weakened immune system, treat autoim- Just as Paracelsus’theory of “like cures like,” the
mune diseases such as AIDS,and help patients with neu- types of cells that are administered correspond in some
686 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypareht
lleC
way with the organ or tissue in the patient that is failing. has approved the use of one cellular therapy technique
No one knows exactly how cell therapy works,but pro- for repairing damaged knee joints. The procedure
ponents claim that the injected cells travel to the similar involves removing healthy chondrocyte cells,the type
organ from which they were taken to revitalize and stim- of cell that forms cartilage,from the patient,culturing
ulate that organ’s function and regenerate its cellular them in a laboratory for three to four weeks,and then
structure. In other words,the cells are not species specif- transplanting them back into the damaged knee joint of
ic,but only organ specific. Supporters of cellular treat- the patient.
ment believe that embryonic and fetal animal tissue con-
tain active therapeutic agents distinct from vitamins, Preparations
minerals,hormones,or enzymes.
There are several processes to prepare cells for use.
Swedish researchers have successfully transplanted One form involves extracting cells from the patient they
human fetal stem cells into human recipients, and the are to be used on and then culturing them in a laboratory
procedure is being investigated further as a possible setting until they multiply to the level needed for trans-
treatment for repairing brain cells in Parkinson’s plant back into the patient. Another procedure uses fresh-
patients. However,because the cells used in these appli- ly removed fetal animal tissue,which has been processed
cations must be harvested from aborted human fetuses, and suspended in a saline solution. The preparation of
there is an ethical debate over their use. fresh cells then may be either injected immediately into
the patient,or preserved by being freeze-dried or deep-
Currently,applications of cell therapy in the United frozen in liquid nitrogen before being injected. Cells may
States is still in the research,experimental,and clinical be tested for pathogens,such as bacteria,viruses,or par-
trial stages. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration asites,before use.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 687
Cell
therapy
PAUL NIEHANS (1882–1971)
Niehans enlisted in the Swiss Army in 1912. When
war erupted in the Balkans, Niehans set up a hospital in
Belgrade, Yugoslavia. The war provided him the opportu-
nity to treat numerous patients, gaining a firsthand knowl-
edge of the body and its workings.
Since 1913, Niehans had been intrigued with Alexis
Carrel’s experiments concerning the adaptive abilities of
cells, though Niehans himself specialized in glandular
transplants and by 1925 was one of the leading glandular
surgeons in Europe.
Niehans referred to 1931 as the birth year of cellular
therapy. That year, he treated a patient suffering from
tetany whose parathyroid had been erroneously removed
by another physician. Too weak for a glandular transplant,
the patient was given injections of the parathyroid glands
of an ox, and she soon recovered. Niehans made more
injections, even experimenting on himself, and reported
he could cure illnesses through injections of live cells
extracted from healthy animal organs. He believed
adding new tissue stimulated rejuvenation and recovery.
(AP/Wide World Photos.Reproduced by permission.)
Niehans treated Pope Pious XII with his injections
and was nominated to the Vatican Academy of Science
Paul Niehans was born and raised in Switzerland. following the pope’s recovery.
His father, a doctor, was dismayed when he entered the
seminary, but Niehans quickly grew dissatisfied with reli- Niehans remained a controversial figure throughout
gious life and took up medicine after all. He first studied his life. As of 2000, the Clinique Paul Niehans in Switzer-
at Bern, then completed an internship in Zurich. land, founded by his daughter, continues his work.
Research and general acceptance
KEY TERMS
There is a growing debate in the medical community
over the efficacy and ethical implications of cell therapy.
Anaphylactic shock—A severe allergic reaction that
Much of the ethical debate revolves around the use of
causes blood pressure drop, racing heart, swelling human fetal stem cells in treatment, and the fact that
of the airway, rash, and possibly convulsions.
these cells must be harvested from aborted fetuses.
Culturing—To grow cells in a special substance,
While some cell therapy procedures have had proven
or media, in the laboratory.
success in clinical studies, others are still largely
Encephalitis—Inflammation of the brain. unproven, including cell therapy for cancer treatment.
Until more large, controlled clinical studies are per-
formed on these procedures to either prove or disprove
their efficacy,they will remain fringe treatments.
Precautions
Patients undergoing cell therapy treatments which Resources
use cells transplanted from animals or other humans run
BOOKS
the risk of cell rejection,in which the body recognizes Sheridan,William,and George Morstyn. Cell Therapy:Stem
the cells as a foreign substance and uses the immune sys- Cell Transplantation,Gene Therapy,and Cellular
tem’s T-cells to attack and destroy them. Some forms of Immunotherapy.Cambridge,UK:Cambridge University
cell therapy use special coatings on the cells designed to Press,1996.
trick the immune system into recognizing the new cells
PERIODICALS
as native to the body.
Sinha,Gunjan. “On the Road to Recovery:Fetal pig cell thera-
There is also the chance of the cell solution transmit- py has put Parkinson’s patient Jim Finn back in the driver’s
ting bacterial or viral infection or other disease and para- seat.”Popular Science255,no. 4 (Oct 1999):77.
sites to the patient. Careful screening and testing of cells
ORGANIZATIONS
for pathogens can reduce this risk.
Center for Cell and Gene Therapy. Baylor College of Medicine.
Many forms of cell therapy in the United States are 1102 Bates St,Suite 1100,Houston,Texas 77030-2399.
still largely experimental procedures. Patients should (713) 770-4663. <http://www.bcm.tmc.edu/genetherapy>.
approach these treatments with extreme caution,should
inquire about their proven efficacy and legal use in the Paula Ford-Martin
United States,and should only accept treatment from a
licensed physician who should educate the patient com- Central Mississippi Valley disease see
pletely on the risks and possible side effects involved Histoplasmosis
with cell therapy. These same cautions apply for patients
interested in participating in clinical trials of cell therapy
treatments.
Side effects Central nervous system
Because cell therapy encompasses such a wide range depressants
of treatments and applications,and many of these treat-
ments are still experimental, the full range of possible Definition
side effects of the treatments are not yet known. Anaphy-
Central nervous system (CNS) depressants are drugs
lactic shock(severe allergic reaction),immune system
that can be used to slow down brain activity.
reactions,and encephalitis(inflammation of the brain)
are just a few of the known reported side effects in some
patients to date. Purpose
Side effects of the FDA-approved chondrocyte cell CNS depressants may be prescribed by a physician
therapy used in knee joint repair may include tissue to treat anxiety, muscle tension, pain, insomnia, acute
hypertrophy,a condition where too much cartilage grows stress reactions,panic attacks,and seizure disorders. In
in the joint where the cells were transplanted to and the higher doses, some CNS depressants may be used as
knee joint begins to stiffen. general anesthetics.
688 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stnasserped
metsys
suovren
lartneC
Description
KEY TERMS
Throughout history,humans have sought relief from
anxiety and insomnia by using substances that depress
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)—A neuro-
brain activity and induce a drowsy or calming effect. CNS
transmitter that slows down the activity of nerve
depressants include a wide range of drugs such as alcohol,
cells in the brain.
narcotics,barbiturates (Amytal,Nembutal,Seconal),ben-
zodiazepines (Ativan,Halcion,Librium,Valium,Xanax), Neurotransmitter—A chemical compound in the
chloral hydrate,and methaqualone (Quaaludes),as well as brain that carries signals from one nerve cell to
newer CNS depressants developed in the 1990s,such as another.
Buspirone (Buspar) and Zolpidem (Ambien),which are
thought to have the fewest sideeffects. Most CNS depres-
sants activate a neurotransmitter called gamma-aminobu-
tyric acid (GABA),which helps decrease brain activity. depressants tend to amplify each other’s effects,which
Street names for CNS depressants include Reds,Yellows, can cause severely reduced heart rate and even death.
Blues,Ludes,Barbs,and Downers.
Resources
Precautions
BOOKS
Most CNS depressants have the potential to be physi- Fontanarosa,P. Alternative Medicine:An Objective Assess-
ment.American Medical Association,2000.
cally and psychologically addictive. Alcohol is the most
widely abused depressant. The body tends to develop tol- ORGANIZATIONS
erance for CNS depressants,and larger doses are needed American Society of Addiction Medicine. 4601 North Park
to achieve the same effects. Withdrawal from some CNS Avenue,Arcade Suite 101,Chevy Chase,MD 20815.
depressants can be uncomfortable; for example, with- (301) 656-3920. <http://www.asam.org>.
drawal from a depressant treating insomnia or anxiety can National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Abuse Informa-
tion (NCADI) Center for Substance Abuse Prevention.
cause rebound insomnia or anxiety as the brain’s activity
5600 Fishers Lane,Rockville,MD 20857. (301) 443-
bounces back after being suppressed. In some cases with-
0365. <http://www.health.org>.
drawal can result in life-threatening seizures. Generally,
National Institute on Drug Abuse. 6001 Executive Blvd,Bethes-
depressant withdrawal should be undertaken under a
da,MD 20892. (301) 443-1124 <http://www.nida.nih.gov>.
physician’s supervision. Many physicians will reduce the
depressant dosage gradually, to give the body time to
Ann Quigley
adjust. Certain CNS depressants such as barbiturates are
easy to overdose on,since there is a relatively small dif-
ference between the optimal dose and an overdose. A
small miscalculation can lead to coma,slowed breathing,
and death. CNS depressants should be administered to
Central nervous system
elderly individuals with care,as these individuals have a
infections
reduced ability to metabolize CNS depressants.
Definition
Side Effects
The central nervous system,or CNS,comprises the
Especially when taken in excess,CNS depressants can brain,the spinal cord,and associated membranes. Under
cause confusion and dizziness,and impair judgment,mem- some circumstances,bacteria may enter areas of the CNS.
ory,intellectual performance,and motor coordination. If this occurs,abscesses or empyemas may be established.
Interactions Description
CNS depressants should be used with other medica- In general,the CNS is well defended against infec-
tions,such as antidepressant medications,only under a tion. The spine and brain are sheathed in tough,protec-
physician’s supervision. Certain herbal remedies,such as tive membranes. The outermost membrane, the dura
Valerian and Kava, may dangerously exacerbate the mater,and the next layer,the arachnoid,entirely encase
effects of certain CNS depressants. Also,ingesting a com- the brain and spinal cord. However,these defenses are
bination of CNS depressants,such Valium and alcohol, not absolute. In rare cases,bacteria gain access to areas
for example,is not advised. When mixed together,CNS within the CNS.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 689
Central
nervous
system
infections
directly into the CNS. However,the source of infection
KEY TERMS cannot always be identified.
Specific symptoms of a CNS infection hinge on its
Abscess—A pus-filled area with definite borders. exact location,but may include severe headacheor back
Arachnoid—One of the membranes that sheathes pain,weakness,sensory loss,and a fever. An individual
the spinal cord and brain; the arachnoid is the sec- may report a stiff neck,nausea or vomiting,and tiredness
ond-layer membrane. or disorientation. There is a potential for seizures,paral-
ysis,or coma.
Cerebrospinal fluid—Fluid that is normally found
in the spinal cord and brain. Abnormal levels of
certain molecules in this fluid can indicate the Diagnosis
presence of infection or damage to the central ner-
Physical symptoms, such as a fever and intense
vous system.
backache or a fever,severe headache,and stiff neck,raise
CT scan (computed tomography)—Cross-sectional the suspicion of a CNS infection. Blood tests may indi-
x rays of the body are compiled to create a three- cate the presence of an infection but do not pinpoint its
dimensional image of the body’s internal structures. location. CT scans or MRI scans of the brain and spine
can provide definitive diagnosis,with an MRI scan being
Dura mater—One of the membranes that sheathes
the most sensitive. A lumbar puncture and analysis of the
the spinal cord and brain; the dura mater is the
cerebrospinal fluid can help diagnose an epidural
outermost layer.
abscess; however, the procedure can be dangerous in
Empyema—A pus-filled area with indefinite borders.
cases of subdural empyema.
Lumbar puncture—A procedure in which a nee-
dle is inserted into the lower spine to collect a
Treatment
sample of cerebrospinal fluid.
A two-pronged approach is taken to treat CNS infec-
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging)—An imaging
tions. First,antibiotic therapy against an array of potential
technique that uses a large circular magnet and
infectious bacteria is begun. The second stage involves
radio waves to generate signals from atoms in the
surgery to drain the infected site. Although some CNS
body. These signals are used to construct images of
infections have been resolved with antibioticsalone,the
internal structures.
more aggressive approach is often preferred. Surgery allows
immediate relief of pressure on the brain or spinal cord,as
well as an opportunity to collect infectious material for bac-
terial identification. Once the bacterial species is identified,
Bacterial infection of the CNS can result in abscess-
drug therapy can be altered to a more specific antibiotic.
es and empyemas (accumulations of pus). Abscesses
However,surgery may not be an option in some cases,such
have fixed boundaries, but empyemas lack definable
as when there are numerous sites of infection or when infec-
shape and size. CNS infections are classified according
tion is located in an inaccessible area of the brain.
to the location where they occur. For example,a spinal
epidural abscessis located above the dura mater,and a
cranial subdural empyema occurs between the dura Prognosis
mater and the arachnoid.
The fatality rate associated with CNS infections
As pus and other material from an infection accumu- ranges from 10% to as high as 40%. Some survivors
late,pressure is exerted on the brain or spinal cord. This experience permanent CNS damage,resulting in partial
pressure can damage the nervous system tissue,possibly paralysis,speech problems,or seizures. Rapid diagnosis
permanently. Without treatment,a CNS infection is fatal. and treatment are essential for a good prognosis. With
prompt medical attention, an individual may recover
completely.
Causes and symptoms
Typically,bacterial invasion results from the spread
Prevention
of a nearby infection; for example, a chronic sinus or
middle ear infection can extend beyond its initial site. Treatment for pre-existing infections,such as sinus
Bacteria may also be conveyed to the CNS from distant or middle ear infections,may prevent some cases of CNS
sites of infection by the bloodstream. In rare cases,head infection. However, since some CNS infections are of
trauma or surgical procedures may introduce bacteria unknown origin,not all are preventable.
690 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoitcefni
metsys
suovren
lartneC
Resources small number of additional members of the CNS stimu-
lant class do not fall into specific chemical groups.
BOOKS
Infections of the Central Nervous System.2nd ed. Ed. W. M.
Scheld,R. J. Whitley,and D. T. Durack. Philadelphia: Precautions
Lippincott-Raven Publishers,1997.
Infectious Diseases of the Central Nervous System. Ed. Ken- Amphetamines have a high potential for abuse. They
neth L. Tyler and Joseph B. Martin. Philadelphia:F. A. should be used in weight reduction programs only when
Davis Co.,1993. alternative therapies have been ineffective. Administra-
tion for prolonged periods may lead to drug dependence.
PERIODICALS
These drugs are classified as schedule II under federal
Brennan,Michael. “Subdural Empyema.”American Family
Physician51,no. 1 (1995):157. drug control regulations.
Darouiche,Rabih O.,et al. “Bacterial Spinal Epidural Abscess: The amphetamines and their cogeners are con-
Review of 43 Cases and Literature Survey.”Medicine71
traindicated in advanced arteriosclerosis,symptomatic
no. 6 (1992):369.
cardiovascular disease, and moderate to severe hyper-
tensionand hyperthyroidism. They should not be used
Julia Barrett
to treat patients with hypersensitivity or idiosyncrasy to
the sympathomimetic amines,or with glaucoma,a histo-
ry of agitated states,a history of drug abuse,or during
the 14 days following administration of monoamine oxi-
dase (MAO) inhibitors.
Central nervous system
Methylphenidate may lower the seizure threshold.
stimulants
Benzphetamine is category X during pregnancy.
Definition Diethylpropion is category B. Other anorexiants have not
been rated; however their use during pregnancy does not
Central nervous system (CNS) stimulants are medi-
appear to be advisable. Safety for use of anorexiants has
cines that speed up physical and mental processes.
not been evaluated.
Amphetamines are all category C during pregnancy.
Purpose
Breastfeeding while receiving amphetamines is not rec-
Central nervous system stimulants are used to treat ommended because the infant may experience withdraw-
conditions characterized by lack of adrenergic stimula- al symptoms.
tion,including narcolepsyand neonatal apnea. Addition-
There have been reports that when used in children,
ally,methylphenidate (Ritalin) and dextroamphetamine
methylphenidate and amphetamines may retard growth.
sulfate (Dexedrine) are used for their paradoxical effect
Although these reports have been questioned,it may be
in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
suggested that the drugs not be administered outside of
The anerexiants,benzphetamine (Didrex),diethyl- school hours (because most children have behavior prob-
propion (Tenuate),phendimetrazine (Bontril,Plegine), lems in school), in order to permit full stature to be
phentermine (Fastin, Ionamine), and sibutramine attained.
(Meridia) are CNS stimulants used for appetite reduction
The most common adverse effects of CNS stimulants
in severe obesity. Although these drugs are structurally
are associated with their primary action. Typical respons-
similar to amphetamine, they cause less sensation of
es include overstimulation,dizziness,restlessness,and
stimulation, and are less suited for use in conditions
similar reactions. Rarely,hematologic reactions,includ-
characterized by lack of adrenergic stimulation.
ing leukopenia, agranulocytosis, and bone marrow
Phenylpropanolamine and ephedrine have been used depression have been reported. Lowering of the seizure
both as diet aids and as vasoconstrictors. threshold has been noted with most drugs in this class.
Description Withdrawal syndrome
The majority of CNS stimulants are chemically sim- Abrupt discontinuation following prolonged high
ilar to the neurohormone norepinephrine,and simulate dosage results in extreme fatigue,mental depression and
the traditional “fight or flight”syndrome associated with changes on the sleep EEG. This response is most evident
sympathetic nervous system arousal. Caffeine is more with amphetamines,but may be observed with all CNS
closely related to the xanthines,such as theophylline. A stimulants taken over a prolonged period of time.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 691
Central
nervous
system
stimulants
KEY TERMS
Agranulocytosis—An acute febrile condition Leucopenia—A condition in which the number of
marked by severe depression of the granulocyte- leukocytes circulating in the blood is abnormally
producing bone marrow, and by prostration, chills, low and which is most commonly due to a
swollen neck, and sore throat sometimes with local decreased production of new cells in conjunction
ulceration. with various infectious diseases or as a reaction to
various drugs or other chemicals.
Anorexiant—A drug that suppresses appetite.
Pregnancy category—A system of classifying drugs
Anxiety—Worry or tension in response to real or
according to their established risks for use during
imagined stress, danger, or dreaded situations. Physi-
pregnancy. Category A: Controlled human studies
cal reactions, such as fast pulse, sweating, trembling,
have demonstrated no fetal risk. Category B: Animal
fatigue, and weakness, may accompany anxiety.
studies indicate no fetal risk, but no human studies,
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)—
or adverse effects in animals, but not in well-con-
A condition in which a person (usually a child) has
trolled human studies. Category C: No adequate
an unusually high activity level and a short attention
human or animal studies, or adverse fetal effects in
span. People with the disorder may act impulsively
animal studies, but no available human data. Cate-
and may have learning and behavioral problems.
gory D: Evidence of fetal risk, but benefits outweigh
Central nervous system—The brain and spinal cord. risks. Category X: Evidence of fetal risk. Risks out-
weigh any benefits.
Depression—A mental condition in which people
feel extremely sad and lose interest in life. People Withdrawal symptoms—A group of physical or
with depression may also have sleep problems and mental symptoms that may occur when a person
loss of appetite, and may have trouble concentrat- suddenly stops using a drug on which he or she has
ing and carrying out everyday activities. become dependent.
Resources Central retinal vein occlusion see
Retinopathies
PERIODICALS
“Are our children overmedicated?”Parade,(October 12,1997):4.
“Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder:not just for kids.”
Mayo Clinic Health Letter,13 (September 1995):6.
“Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder:there is no easy
answer on whether to medicate or not.”British Medical
Cephalosporins
Journal,315 (October 11,1997):894.
“The run on Ritalin:attention deficit disorder and stimulant
Definition
treatment in the 1990s.”The Hastings Center Report,26
(March-April 1996):12. Cephalosporins are medicines that kill bacteria or
prevent their growth.
ORGANIZATION
Children and Adults with Attention Deficit Disorders
(CH.A.D.D.). 499 N.W. 70th Avenue,Suite 109,Planta- Purpose
tion,FL 33317. (305) 587-3700.
Cephalosporins are used to treat infections in different
OTHER parts of the body—the ears,nose,throat,lungs,sinuses,and
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorderPamphlet. National skin,for example. Physicians may prescribe these drugs to
Institute of Mental Health,1994. treat pneumonia,strep throat,staph infections,tonsillitis,
Facts about childhood hyperactivityPamphlet. National Insti-
bronchitis,and gonorrhea. These drugs will notwork for
tute of Child Health and Human Development,1990.
colds,flu,and other infections caused by viruses.
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
Description
Central retinal artery occlusion see
Examples of cephalosporins are cefaclor (Ceclor),
Retinopathies cefadroxil (Duricef),cefazolin (Ancef,Kefzol,Zolicef),
692 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sniropsolahpeC
cefixime (Suprax),cefoxitin (Mefoxin),cefprozil (Cefzil),
ceftazidime (Ceptaz,Fortaz,Tazicef,Tazideme),cefurox- KEY TERMS
ime (Ceftin) and cephalexin (Keflex). These medicines are
available only with a physician’s prescription. They are Bronchitis—Inflammation of the air passages of
sold in tablet,capsule,liquid,and injectable forms. the lungs.
Colitis—Inflammation of the colon (large bowel).
Recommended dosage
Gonorrhea—A sexually transmitted disease (STD)
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
that causes infection in the genital organs and may
cephalosporin. Check with the physician who prescribed
cause disease in other parts of the body.
the drug or the pharmacist who filled the prescription for
Inflammation—Pain, redness, swelling, and heat
the correct dosage.
that usually develop in response to injury or illness.
Always take cephalosporins exactly as directed by
Phenylketonuria—(PKU) A genetic disorder in
your physician. Never take larger, smaller, more fre-
which the body lacks an important enzyme. If
quent,or less frequent doses. Take the drug for exactly as
untreated, the disorder can lead to brain damage
long as directed—no more and no less. Do not save some
and mental retardation.
doses of the drug to take for future infections. The medi-
cine may not be right for other kinds of infections,even Pneumonia—A disease in which the lungs become
if the symptoms are the same. In addition,take all of the inflamed. Pneumonia may be caused by bacteria,
medicine to treat the infection for which it was pre- viruses, or other organisms, or by physical or
scribed. The infection may not clear up completely if too chemical irritants.
little medicine is taken. Taking this medicine for too
Sexually transmitted disease—A disease that is
long,on the other hand,may open the door to new infec-
passed from one person to another through sexual
tions that do not respond to the drug.
intercourse or other intimate sexual contact. Also
Some cephalosporins work best when taken on an called STD.
empty stomach. Others should be taken after meals.
Staph infection—Infection with Staphylococcus
Check with the physician who prescribed the medicine or
bacteria. These bacteria can infect any part of the
the pharmacist who filled the prescription for instruc-
body.
tions on how to take the medicine.
Strep throat—A sore throat caused by infection
with Streptococcus bacteria. Symptoms include
Precautions
sore throat, chills, fever, and swollen lymph nodes
Certain cephalosporins should not be combined with in the neck.
alcohol or with medicines that contain alcohol. Abdomi- Tonsillitis—Inflammation of a tonsil, a small mass
nal or stomach cramps,nausea,vomiting,facial flushing, of tissue in the throat.
and other symptoms may result within 15–30 minutes
and may last for several hours. Do not drink alcoholic
beverages or use other medicines that contain alcohol
while being treated with cephalosporins and for several DIABETES. Some cephalosporins may cause false
days after treatment ends. positive results on urine sugar tests for diabetes. People
with diabetes should check with their physicians to see if
Special conditions they need to adjust their medication or their diets.
People with certain medical conditions or who are
PHENYLKETONURIA. Oral suspensions of cefprozil
taking certain other medicines can have problems if they
contain phenylalanine. People with phenylketonuria
take cephalosporins. Before taking these drugs,be sure
(PKU) should consult a physician before taking this
to let the physician know about any of these conditions:
medicine.
ALLERGIES. Severe allergic reactions to this medicine PREGNANCY. Women who are pregnant or who may
may occur. Anyone who is allergic to cephalosporins of
become pregnant should check with their physicians
any kind should not take other cephalosporins. Anyone
before using cephalosporins.
who is allergic to penicillin should check with a physician
before taking any cephalosporin. The physician should BREASTFEEDING. Cephalosporins may pass into
also be told about any allergiesto foods,dyes,preserva- breast milk and may affect nursing babies. Women who
tives,or other substances. are breastfeeding and who need to take this medicine
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 693
Cephalosporins
should check with their physicians. They may need to •blood thinning drugs (anticoagulants) such as warfarin
stop breastfeeding until treatment is finished. (Coumadin)
•blood viscosity reducing medicines such as pentoxi-
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using
fylline (Trental)
cephalosporins,people with any of these medical prob-
lems should make sure their physicians are aware of their •the antiseizure medicines divalproex (Depakote) and
conditions: valproic acid (Depakene)
•History of stomach or intestinal problems,especially col- Cephalosporins may also interact with other medi-
itis. Cephalosporins may cause colitis in some people. cines. When this happens,the effects of one or both of
the drugs may change or the risk of side effects may be
•Kidney problems. The dose of cephalosporin may need
greater. Anyone who takes cephalosporins should let the
to be lower.
physician know all other medicines he or she is taking.
•Bleeding problems. Cephalosporins may increase the
chance of bleeding in people with a history of bleeding
problems. Nancy Ross-Flanigan
•Liver disease. The dose of cephalosporin may need to
Cerebral abscess see Brain abscess
be lower.
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking cephalosporins
with certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs
work or may increase the chance of side effects.
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy
Side effects
Definition
Get medical attention immediately if any of these
symptoms develop while taking cephalosporins: Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is also known
•shortness of breath as congophilic angiopathy or cerebrovascular amyloido-
sis. It is a disease of small blood vessels in the brain in
•Pounding heartbeat
which deposits of amyloid protein in the vessel walls
•Skin rash or hives may lead to stroke, brain hemorrhage, or dementia.
•Severe cramps or painin the stomach or abdomen Amyloid protein resembles a starch and is deposited in
tissues during the course of certain chronic diseases.
•Fever
•Severe watery or bloody diarrhea (may occur up to
Description
several weeks after stopping the drug)
CAA may affect patients over age 45,but is most com-
•Unusual bleeding or bruising
mon in patients over age 65,and becomes more common
Other rare side effects may occur. Anyone who has
with increasing age. Men and women are equally affected.
unusual symptoms during or after treatment with
In some cases,CAA is sporadic but it may also be inherited
cephalosporins should get in touch with his or her physi-
as an autosomal dominant condition (a form of inheritance
cian.
in which only one copy of a gene coding for a disease need
be present for that disease to be expressed; if either parent
Interactions has the disease,a child has a 50% chance of inheriting the
Some cephalosporins cause diarrhea. Certain diar- disease). CAA is responsible for 5–20% of brain hemor-
rhea medicines, such as diphenoxylate-atropine rhages and up to 30% of lobar hemorrhages localized to one
(Lomotil),may make the problem worse. Check with a lobe of the brain. CAA may be found during an autopsyin
physician before taking any medicine for diarrhea caused over one-third of persons over age 60, even though they
by taking cephalosporins. may not have had brain hemorrhage,stroke,or other mani-
festations of the disease during life. In Alzheimer’s disease,
Birth control pills may not work properly when
CAA is more common than in the general population,and
taken at the same time as cephalosporins. To prevent
may occur in more than 80% of patients over age 60.
pregnancy,use other methods of birth control in addi-
tion to the pills while taking cephalosporins.
Causes and symptoms
Taking cephalosporins with certain other drugs may
increase the risk of excess bleeding. Among the drugs that The cause of amyloid deposits in blood vessels in the
may have this effect when taken with cephalosporins are: brain in sporadic CAA is not known. In hereditary CAA,
694 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yhtapoigna
diolyma
larbereC
genetic defects,typically on chromosome 21,allow accu-
mulation of amyloid, a protein made up of units called KEY TERMS
beta-pleated sheet fibrils. The fibrils tend to clump togeth-
er,so that the amyloid cannot be dissolved and builds up Amyloid—Amyloid protein resembles a starch and
in the brain blood vessel walls. One form of amyloid fibril is deposited in tissues during the course of certain
subunit proteins is the amyloid beta protein. chronic diseases.
Different theories have been suggested for the Ataxia—Problems with coordination and walking.
source of amyloid beta protein in the brain. The systemic
Autosomal dominant—A form of inheritance in
theory suggests that amyloid beta protein in the blood
which only one copy of a gene coding for a dis-
stream is deposited in blood vessels in the brain,causing
ease need be present for that disease to be
weakness in the blood vessel wall and breakdown in the
expressed. If either parent has the disease, a child
blood-brain barrier. Normally, the blood-brain barrier
has a 50% chance of inheriting the disease.
keeps proteins and other large molecules from escaping
from the blood vessel to the brain tissue. When there is Chromosome—A cellular structure containing
breakdown of the blood-brain barrier,amyloid beta pro- genetic information in the form of DNA.
tein leaks through the blood vessel wall,and is deposited Dementia—Loss of memory and other higher
in the brain substance,where it forms an abnormal struc- functions, such as thinking or speech, lasting six
ture called a neuritic plaque. months or more.
A second,more likely theory is that amyloid fibrils Hemorrhage—Bleeding, or escape of blood
that form amyloid beta protein are produced by perivas- through ruptured or unruptured blood vessel walls.
cular microglia,or support cells in contact with the brain
Lobar hemorrhage—Bleeding into one of the
blood vessel wall. The third theory is that the brain tissue
lobes of the brain.
gives rise to amyloid beta protein. Both the nerve cells
Seizure—Epileptic convulsion, fit, or attack.
and the glia are known to produce amyloid precursor
protein,which increases with agingand with cell stress. Sporadic—A form of disease found in persons
without a family history of the disease.
Bleeding into the brain may occur as tiny blood ves-
sels carrying amyloid deposits become heavier and more Spasticity—Limb stiffness related to disease of the
brittle,and are therefore more likely to burst with minor brain or spinal cord.
trauma or with fluctuating blood pressure. Aneurysms,or
Stroke—Sudden neurological deficit related to
ballooning of the blood vessel wall, may develop, and
impaired blood supply to the brain.
may also rupture as the stretched wall becomes thinner
and is under more pressure. Amyloid deposits may
destroy smooth muscle cells or cause inflammation in the
blood vessel wall. This may also cause the blood vessel
to break more easily. hemorrhage. Petechial hemorrhages (tiny hemorrhages
involving many small vessels) may produce recurrent,
The most common form of CAA is the sporadic
brief neurologic symptoms secondary to seizures or
form associated with aging. This type of CAA usually
decreased blood flow,or may produce rapidly progres-
causes lobar hemorrhage,which may recur in different
sive dementia (loss of memory and other brain functions)
lobes of the brain. The frontal lobe (behind the forehead)
that worsens in distinct steps rather than gradually. Over
and parietal lobe (behind the frontal lobe) are most often
40% of patients with hemorrhage secondary to CAA also
affected; the temporal lobe (near the temple) and occipi-
have dementia.
tal lobe (at the back of the brain) are affected less often;
and the cerebellum (under the occipital lobe) is rarely Genetic factors play a role in certain types of CAA
affected. Approximately 10–50% of hemorrhages in spo- and in diseases associated with CAA:
radic CAA involve more than one lobe.
•Dutch type of hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with
Symptoms of lobar hemorrhage in CAA include amyloidosis (build up of amyloid protein in blood ves-
sudden onset of headache,neurologic symptoms such as sels): autosomal dominant, with a genetic mutation
weakness,sensory loss,visual changes,or speech prob- involving the amyloid precursor protein. Onset is at age
lems, depending on which lobe is involved; and 40–60 with headaches,brain hemorrhage often in the
decreased level of consciousness (a patient who is diffi- parietal lobe,strokes,and dementia. More than half of
cult to arouse), nausea, and vomiting. Sporadic CAA patients die from their first hemorrhage. Patients with
may be associated with symptoms unrelated to lobar the Dutch type of CAA may produce an abnormal anti-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 695
Cerebral
amyloid
angiopathy
coagulant,or blood thinner,which makes hemorrhage excluding arteriovenous malformation,brain tumor,or
more likely. other causes of hemorrhage. Angiography(x-ray study
of the interior of blood vessels and the heart) is not help-
•Flemish type of hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with
ful in diagnosis of CAA,but may be needed to exclude
amyloidosis: autosomal dominant, with a mutation
aneurysm. Brain biopsy (surgical removal of a small
involving the amyloid precursor protein. Symptoms
piece of brain tissue) may show characteristic amyloid
include brain hemorrhage or dementia.
deposits,but is rarely performed,as the risk may not be
•Familial Alzheimer’s disease: autosomal dominant,
justifiable in the absence of effective treatment for CAA.
comprising 5–10% of all Alzheimer’s disease cases (a
If diagnosis is uncertain,biopsy may be needed to rule
brain disease in which deathof nerve cells leads to pro-
out conditions which are potentially treatable. Definite
gressive dementia).
diagnosis requires microscopic examination of brain tis-
•Down Syndrome:caused by trisomy 21 (three rather sue,either at biopsy,at autopsy,or at surgery when brain
than two copies of chromosome 21), causing excess hemorrhage is drained. Lumbar puncture to examine
amyloid precursor protein gene. Children with Down cerebrospinal fluid proteins may show characteristic
syndrome are mentally handicapped and may have abnormalities, but is not part of the routine exam. In
heart problems. familial forms,genetic analysis may be helpful.
•Icelandic type of hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with CAA with hemorrhage must be distinguished from
amyloidosis:autosomal dominant,with mutation in the other types of brain hemorrhage. In CAA, hemorrhage
gene coding for cystatin C. Symptoms often begin at typically occurs in the lobar region,often ruptures into the
age 30–40 with multiple brain hemorrhages,dementia, subarachnoid space between the brain and its coverings,
paralysis (weakness), and death in 10–20 years. and occurs at night. In hemorrhage related to high blood
Headache occurs in more than half of patients, and pressure,hemorrhage is usually deeper within the brain,
seizures occur in one-quarter. Unlike most other forms ruptures into the ventricles or cavities deep inside the
of CAA,most hemorrhages involve the basal ganglia brain,and occurs during daytime activities. Other causes
deep within the brain (Basal ganglia are islands of tis- of brain hemorrhage are arteriovenous malformations,
sues in the cerebellum part of the brain.). trauma,aneurysms,bleeding into a brain tumor,vasculi-
tis(inflammation of blood vessels),or bleeding disorders.
•Familial oculo-leptomeningeal amyloidosis:autosomal
dominant with unknown gene defect(s), described in
Japanese,Italian,and North American families. Symp- Treatment
toms can include dementia,ataxia (problems with coor-
Although there is no effective treatment for the under-
dination),spasticity (limb stiffness),strokes,seizures,
lying disease process of CAA,measures can be taken to
peripheral neuropathy(disease affecting the nerves
prevent brain hemorrhage in patients diagnosed with CAA.
supplying the limbs),migraine,spinal cord problems,
High blood pressure should be treated aggressively,and
blindness, and deafness. Brain hemorrhage is rare as
even normal blood pressure can be lowered as much as tol-
the amyloid protein is deposited in blood vessels in the
erated without side effects from medications. Blood thin-
eye and meninges (brain coverings),but not in the brain
ners such as Coumadin,antiplatelet agents such as aspirin,
itself. In Italian families with the disease,patients may
or medications designed to dissolve blood clots may cause
be affected as early as 20–30 years of age.
hemorrhage in patients with CAA,and should be avoided if
•British type of familial amyloidosis:autosomal domi- possible. If these medications are required for other condi-
nant with unknown gene defect(s),associated with pro- tions,such as heart disease,the potential benefits must be
gressive dementia, spasticity, and ataxia. Brain stem, carefully weighed against the increased risks.
spinal cord,and cerebellum all exhibit amyloid deposits,
Seizures,or recurrent neurologic symptoms thought
but hemorrhage typically does not occur.
to be seizures, should be treated with anti-epileptic
drugs,although Depakote (sodium valproate) should be
Diagnosis avoided because of its antiplatelet effect. Anti-epileptic
drugs are sometimes given to patients with large lobar
As in most neurologic diseases,diagnosis is made
hemorrhage in an attempt to prevent seizures,although
most often from the patient’s history,with careful inquiry
the benefit of this is unclear.
into family history and the patient’s onset and pattern of
symptoms, as well as neurologic examination. Brain Once brain hemorrhage has occurred, the patient
computed tomography scan (CT) or magnetic reso- should be admitted to a hospital (ICU) for neurologic
nance imaging(MRI) may identify lobar hemorrhage, monitoring and control of increased pressure within the
stroke, or petechial hemorrhages, and are important in brain, blood pressure control, and supportive medical
696 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yhtapoigna
diolyma
larbereC
care. Antiplatelet agents and blood thinners should be dis- brain. Because of the flaw,the artery wall bulges outward
continued and their effects reversed,if possible. Surgery and fills with blood. This bulge is called an aneurysm. An
may be needed to remove brain hemorrhage, although aneurysm can rupture,spilling blood into the surround-
bleeding during surgery may be difficult to control. ing body tissue. A ruptured cerebral aneurysm can cause
permanent brain damage,disability,or death.
CAA may be rarely associated with cerebral vasculitis,
or inflammation of the blood vessel walls. In these cases
treatment with steroids or immune system suppressants
Description
may be helpful. Without tissue examination,vasculitis can-
not be diagnosed reliably,and probably coexists with CAA A cerebral aneurysm can occur anywhere in the brain.
too rarely to justify steroid treatment in most cases. Aneurysms can have several shapes. The saccular
aneurysm,once called a berry aneurysm,resembles a piece
Prognosis of fruit dangling from a branch. Saccular aneurysms are
usually found at a branch in the blood vessel where they
Since CAA is associated with progressive blood ves-
balloon out by a thin neck. Saccular cerebral aneurysms
sel degeneration, and since there is no effective treat-
most often occur at the branch points of large arteries at the
ment,most patients have a poor prognosis. Aggressive
base of the brain. Aneurysms may also take the form of a
neurosurgical management allows increased survival fol-
bulge in one wall of the artery—a lateral aneurysm—or a
lowing lobar hemorrhage, but as of 1998, 20–90% of
widening of the entire artery—a fusiform aneurysm.
patients die from the first hemorrhage or its complica-
tions, which include progression of hemorrhage, brain The greatest danger of aneurysms is rupture.
edema(swelling) with herniation (downward pressure Approximately 50–75% of stricken people survive an
on vital brain structures),seizures,and infections such as aneurysmal rupture. A ruptured aneurysm spills blood
pneumonia. Many survivors have persistent neurologic into the brain or into the fluid-filled area that surrounds
deficits related to the brain lobe affected by hemorrhage, the brain tissue. Bleeding into this area,called the sub-
and are at risk for additional hemorrhages,seizures,and arachnoid space,is referred to as subarachnoid hemor-
dementia. Prognosis is worse in patients who are older, rhage(SAH). About 25,000 people suffer a SAH each
or who have larger hemorrhages or recurrent hemor- year. It is estimated that people with unruptured
rhages within a short time. aneurysm have an annual 1–2% risk of hemorrhage.
Under age 40,more men experience SAH. After age 40,
more women than men are affected.
Resources
Most people who have suffered a SAH from a rup-
PERIODICALS
Bornebroek,M.,et.al. “White Matter Lesions and Cognitive tured aneurysm did not know that the aneurysm even
Deterioration in Presymptomatic Carriers of the Amyloid existed. Based on autopsystudies,medical researchers
Precursor Protein Gene Codon 693 Mutation.”Archives of estimate that 1–5% of the population has some type of
Neurology53,no. 1 (1996):43-48. cerebral aneurysm. Aneurysms rarely occur in the very
Itoh,Y.,et.al. “Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy:a Significant young or the very old; about 60% of aneurysms are diag-
Cause of Cerebellar as well as Lobar Cerebral Hemor- nosed in people between ages 40 and 65.
rhage in the Elderly.”Journal of Neurological Sciences
116,no. 2 (1993):135-41. Some aneurysms may have a genetic link and run in
Neau,J. P.,et.al. “Recurrent Intracerebral Hemorrhage.”Neu- families. The genetic link has not been completely
rology49,no. 1 (1997):106-113. proven and a pattern of inheritance has not been deter-
Olichney,J. M.,et.al. “Cerebral Infarction in Alzheimer’s Dis- mined. Some studies seem to show that first-degree rela-
ease Is Associated with Severe Amyloid Angiopathy and tives of people who suffered aneurysmal SAH are more
Hypertension.”In Archives of Neurology52,no. 7 (1995): likely to have aneurysms themselves. These studies
702-8.
reported that such immediate family members were four
Laurie Barclay,MD times more likely to have aneurysms than the general
population. Other studies do not confirm these findings.
Better evidence links aneurysms to certain rare diseases
of the connective tissue. These diseases include Marfan
Cerebral aneurysm syndrome,pseudoxanthoma elasticum,Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome,and fibromuscular dysplasia. Polycystic kid-
Definition ney diseaseis also associated with cerebral aneurysms.
A cerebral aneurysm occurs at a weak point in the These diseases are also associated with an increased
wall of a blood vessel (artery) that supplies blood to the risk of aneurysmal rupture. Certain other conditions raise
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 697
Cerebral
aneurysm
the risk of rupture,too. Most aneurysms that rupture are ly in women. Whatever the cause may be,the inner wall
a half-inch or larger in diameter. Size is not the only fac- of the blood vessel is abnormally thin and the pressure of
tor, however, because smaller aneurysms also rupture. the blood flow causes an aneurysm to form.
Cigarette smoking,excessive alcohol consumption,and
Most aneurysms go unnoticed until they rupture.
recreational drug use (for example,use of cocaine) have
However,10–15% of unruptured cerebral aneurysms are
been linked with an increased risk. The role, if any, of
found because of their size or their location. Common
high blood pressure has not been determined. Some stud-
warning signs include symptoms that affect only one eye,
ies have implicated high blood pressure in aneurysm for-
such as an enlarged pupil, a drooping eyelid, or pain
mation and rupture,but people with normal blood pres-
above or behind the eye. Other symptoms are a localized
sure also experience aneurysms and SAHs. High blood
headache, unsteady gait, a temporary problem with
pressure may be a risk factor but not the most important
sight,double vision,or numbness in the face.
one. Pregnancy, labor, and delivery also seem to
increase the possibility that an aneurysm might rupture,
Some aneurysms bleed occasionally without rupturing.
but not all doctors agree. Physical exertion and use of
Symptoms of such an aneurysm develop gradually. The
oral contraceptives are not suspected causes for aneurys-
symptoms include headache,nausea,vomiting,neck pain,
mal rupture.
black-outs,ringing in the ears,dizziness,or seeing spots.
Eighty to ninety percent of aneurysms are not diag-
Causes and symptoms
nosed until after they have ruptured. Rupture is not
Cerebral aneurysms can be caused by brain trauma, always a sudden event. Nearly 50% of patients who have
infection,hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis),or aneurysmal SAHs also experience “the warning leak
abnormal rapid cell growth (neoplastic disease),but most phenomenon.” Persons with warning leak symptoms
seem to arise from a congenital, or developmental, have sudden, atypical headaches that occur days or
defect. These congenital aneurysms occur more frequent- weeks before the actual rupture. These headaches are
698 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
msyruena
larbereC
Three aneurysms can be seen in this section of a cerebral artery removed from a human brain.(Photograph by Martin Rotker,
Phototake NYC.Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Congenital—Existing at birth. Nimodipine (Nimotop)—A calcium-channel block-
er, that is, a drug that relaxes arterial smooth muscle
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome—A rare inheritable dis-
by slowing the movement of calcium across cell
ease of the connective tissue marked by very elastic
walls.
skin, very loose joints, and very fragile body tissue.
Embolization—A technique to stop or prevent hem- Polycystic kidney disease—An abnormal condition
orrhage by introducing a foreign mass, such as an in which the kidneys are enlarged and contain
air-filled membrane (balloon), into a blood vessel to many cysts.
block the flow of blood.
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum—A hereditary disorder
Fibromuscular dysplasia—A disorder that causes
of the connective, or elastic, tissue marked by pre-
unexplained narrowing of arteries and high blood
mature aging and breakdown of the skin and
pressure.
degeneration of the arteries that leads to hemor-
Magnetic resonance angiography—A noninvasive rhages.
diagnostic technique that uses radio waves to map
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH)—Loss of blood
the internal anatomy of the blood vessels.
into the subarachnoid space, the fluid-filled area
Marfan syndrome—An inheritable disorder that
that surrounds the brain tissue.
affects the skeleton, joints, and blood vessels. Major
indicators are excessively long arms and legs, lax Vasospasm—Narrowing of a blood vessel caused
joints, and vascular defects. by a spasm of the smooth muscle of the vessel wall.
referred to as sentinel headaches. Nausea,vomiting,and 72 hours of the rupture. Later scans may miss the signs
dizziness may accompany sentinel headaches. Unfortu- of hemorrhage.
nately, these symptoms can be confused with tension
If the CT scan is negative for a hemorrhage or pro-
headaches or migraines, and treatment can be delayed
vides an unclear diagnosis,the doctor will order a cere-
until rupture occurs.
brospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, also called a lumbar
When an aneurysm ruptures, most victims experi- puncture. In this procedure, a small amount of cere-
ence a sudden, extremely severe headache. This brospinal fluid is removed from the lower back and
headache is typically described as the worst headache of examined for traces of blood and blood-breakdown prod-
the victim’s life. Nausea and vomiting commonly ucts. If this test is positive,cerebral angiographyis used
accompany the headache. The person may experience a to map the brain’s blood vessels and the damaged area.
short loss of consciousness or prolonged coma. Other The angiography is done to pinpoint the aneurysm’s
common signs of a SAH include a stiff neck,fever,and a location. About 15% of people who experience SAH
sensitivity to light. About 25% of victims experience have more than one aneurysm. For this reason,angiogra-
neurological problems linked to specific areas of the phy should include both the common carotid artery that
brain, swelling of the brain due to fluid accumulation feeds the front of the brain and the vertebral artery that
(hydrocephalus),or seizure. feeds the base of the brain. Occasionally,the angiogra-
phy fails to find the aneurysm and must be repeated. If
seizures occur,electroencephalography(EEG) may be
Diagnosis
used to measure the electrical activity of the brain.
Based on the clinical symptoms, a doctor will run
several tests to confirm an aneurysm or an SAH. A com-
puted tomography(CT) scan of the head is the initial Treatment
procedure. A magnetic resonance imagingtest (MRI)
Unruptured aneurysm
may be done instead of a CT scan. MRI,however,is not
as sensitive as CT for detecting subarachnoid blood. A If an aneurysm has not ruptured and is not causing
CT scan can determine whether there has been a hemor- any symptoms,it may be left untreated. Because there is
rhage and can assist in pinpointing the location of the a 1–2% chance of rupture per year,the cumulative risk
aneurysm. The scan is most useful when it is done within over a number of years may justify surgical treatment.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 699
Cerebral
aneurysm
However, if the aneurysm is small or in a place that vive. An additional 25–50% die as a result of complica-
would be difficult to reach,or if the person who has the tions associated with the hemorrhage. Of the survivors,
aneurysm is in poor health,the surgical treatment may be 15–50% suffer permanent brain damage and disability.
a greater risk than the aneurysm. Risk of rupture is high- These conditions are caused by the death of nerve cells.
er for people who have more than one aneurysm. Unrup- Nerve cells can be destroyed by the hemorrhage itself or
tured aneurysm would probably be treated with a surgi- by complications from the hemorrhage, such as
cal procedure called the clip ligation,as described below. vasospasm or hydrocephalus. Hydrocephalus,a dilata-
tion (expansion) of the fluid-filled cavity surrounding the
Ruptured aneurysm brain,occurs in about 15% of cases. Immediate medical
treatment is vital to prevent further complications and
The primary treatment for a ruptured aneurysm
brain damage in those who survive the initial rupture.
involves stabilizing the victim’s condition,treating the
Patients who survive SAH and aneurysm clipping are
immediate symptoms, and promptly assessing further
unlikely to die from events related to SAH.
treatment options, especially surgical procedures. The
patient may require mechanical ventilation,oxygen,and
Prevention
fluids. Medications may be given to prevent major sec-
ondary complications such as seizures,rebleeding,and There are no known methods to prevent an aneurysm
vasospasm (narrowing of the affected blood vessel). from forming. If an aneurysm is discovered before it rup-
Vasospasm decreases blood flow to the brain and causes tures,it may be surgically removed. CT or MRI angiogra-
the death of nerve cells. A drug such as nimodipine phy may be recommended for relatives of patients with
(Nimotop) may help prevent vasospasm by relaxing the familial cerebral aneurysms.
smooth muscle tissue of the arteries. Even with treat-
ment,however,vasospasm may cause strokeor death. Resources
To prevent further hemorrhage from the aneurysm,it
BOOKS
must be removed from circulation. In general,surgical Smith,Robert R.,Yahgoub Tarassoli,and Yuri Zubkov. Cere-
procedures should be performed as soon as possible to bral Aneurysms:Microvascular and Endovascular Man-
prevent rebleeding. The chances that aneurysm will agement.New York:Springer-Verlag,1994.
rebleed are greatest in the first 24 hours,and vasospasm
PERIODICALS
usually does not occur until 72 hours or more after rup-
Leblanc,Richard. “Familial Cerebral Aneurysms.”Canadian
ture. If the patient is in poor condition or if there is
Journal of Neurological Sciences24,no. 3 (Aug. 1997):
vasospasm or other complication, surgical procedures
191-199.
may be delayed. The preferred surgical method is a clip Olafsson,Elias,Allen Hauser,and Gunnar Gudmundsson. “A
ligation in which a clip is placed around the base of the Population-Based Study of the Prognosis of Ruptured Cere-
aneurysm to block it off from circulation. Surgical coat- bral Aneurysms:Mortality and Recurrence of Subarachnoid
ing,wrapping,or trapping of the aneurysm may also be Hemorrhage.”Neurology48 (May 1997):1191-1195.
performed. These procedures do not completely remove Sawin,Paul D.,and Christopher M. Loftus. “Diagnosis of
the aneurysm from circulation, however, and there is Spontaneous Subarachnoid Hemorrhage.”American Fam-
ily Physician55,no. 1 (Jan. 1997):145.
some risk that it may rebleed in the future. Newer tech-
Yasui,Nobuyuki,et al. “Long-term Follow-up Study of Unrup-
niques that look promising include balloon embolization,
tured Intracranial Aneurysms.”Neurosurgery40,no. 6
a procedure that blocks the aneurysm with an inflatable
(June 1997):1155-1160.
membrane introduced by means of a catheter inserted
through the artery. ORGANIZATIONS
The Brain Aneurysm Foundation,Inc. 66 Canal St.,Boston,
MA 02114. (617) 723-3870. <http://neurosurgery.mgh.
Prognosis
harvard.edu/baf>.
An unruptured aneurysm may not cause any symp- OTHER
toms over an entire lifetime. Surgical clip ligation will Bernadini,Gary L. “Intracerebral Aneurysms.”Columbia Univer-
ensure that it won’t rupture,but it may be better to leave sity Health Sciences Page.<http://cpmcnet.columbia.edu>.
the aneurysm alone in some cases. Familial cerebral “The Brain Aneurysm Report.”Neurosurgical Sevice Page.
aneurysms may rupture earlier than those without a Harvard Medical School <http://neurosurgery.mgh.
genetic link. harvard.edu/abta/primer.htm>.
The outlook is not as good for a person who suffers a Julia Barrett
ruptured aneurysm. Fifteen to twenty-five percent of
people who experience a ruptured aneurysm do not sur- Cerebral angiography see Angiography
700 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
msyruena
larbereC
diplegia,both limbs on one side of the body is hemiple-
Cerebral palsy gia,and in all four limbs is quadriplegia. Muscles of the
trunk,neck,and head may be affected as well.
Definition
CP can be caused by a number of different mecha-
Cerebral palsy (CP) is the term used for a group of nisms at various times—from several weeks after concep-
nonprogressive disorders of movement and posture tion,through birth,to early childhood. For many years,it
caused by abnormal development of, or damage to, was accepted that most cases of CP were due to brain
motor control centers of the brain. CP is caused by events injuries received during a traumatic birth,known as birth
before,during,or after birth. The abnormalities of mus- asphyxia. However, extensive research in the 1980s
cle control that define CP are often accompanied by showed that only 5–10% of CP can be attributed to birth
other neurological and physical abnormalities. trauma. Other possible causes include abnormal develop-
ment of the brain,prenatal factors that directly or indirectly
Description damage neurons in the developing brain,premature birth,
and brain injuries that occur in the first few years of life.
Voluntary movement (walking, grasping, chewing,
etc.) is primarily accomplished using muscles that are Advances in the medical care of premature infants in
attached to bones,known as the skeletal muscles. Control the last 20 years have dramatically increased the rate of
of the skeletal muscles originates in the cerebral cortex, survival of these fragile newborns. However, as gesta-
the largest portion of the brain. Palsy means paralysis, tional age at delivery and birth weight of a baby
but may also be used to describe uncontrolled muscle decrease,the risk for CP dramatically increases. A term
movement. Therefore, cerebral palsy encompasses any pregnancy is delivered at 37–41 weeks gestation. The
disorder of abnormal movement and paralysis caused by risk for CP in a preterm infant (32–37 weeks) is
abnormal function of the cerebral cortex. In truth,howev- increased about five-fold over the risk for an infant born
er,CP does not include conditions due to progressive dis- at term. Survivors of extremely preterm births (less than
ease or degeneration of the brain. For this reason,CP is 28 weeks) face as much as a 50-fold increase in risk.
also referred to as static (nonprogressive) encephalopathy About 50% of all cases of CP now being diagnosed are in
(disease of the brain). Also excluded from CP are any dis- children who were born prematurely.
orders of muscle control that arise in the muscles them- Two factors are involved in the risk for CP associat-
selves and/or in the peripheral nervous system (nerves ed with prematurity. First,premature babies are at high-
outside the brain and spinal cord). er risk for various CP-associated medical complications,
CP is not a specific diagnosis,but is more accurately such as intracerebral hemorrhage,infection,and difficul-
considered a description—a description of a broad but ty in breathing,to name a few. Second,the onset of pre-
defined group of neurological and physical problems. mature labormay be induced,in part,by complications
that have already caused neurologic damage in the fetus.
The symptoms of CP and their severity are quite
A combination of both factors almost certainly plays a
variable. Those with CP may have only minor difficulty
role in some cases of CP. The tendency toward premature
with fine motor skills,such as grasping and manipulating
delivery runs in families,but the genetic mechanisms are
items with their hands. A severe form of CP could
far from clear.
involve significant muscle problems in all four limbs,
mental retardation, seizures, and difficulties with An increase in multiple pregnancies in recent years,
vision,speech,and hearing. especially in the United States, is blamed on the
increased use of fertility drugs. As the number of fetuses
Muscles that receive defective messages from the
in a pregnancy increases,the risks for abnormal develop-
brain may be constantly contracted and tight (spastic),
ment and premature delivery also increase. Children
exhibit involuntary writhing movements (athetosis),or
from twin pregnancies have four times the risk of devel-
have difficulty with voluntary movement (dyskinesia).
oping CP as children from singleton pregnancies,owing
There can also be a lack of balance and coordination with
to the fact that more twin pregnancies are delivered pre-
unsteady movements (ataxia). A combination of any of
maturely. The risk for CP in a child of triplets is up to 18
these problems may also occur. Spastic CP and mixed
times greater. Furthermore,recent evidence suggests that
CP constitute the majority of cases. Effects on the mus-
a baby from a pregnancy in which its twin died before
cles can range from mild weakness or partial paralysis
birth is at increased risk for CP.
(paresis),to complete loss of voluntary control of a mus-
cle or group of muscles (plegia). CP is also designated by Approximately 500,000 children and adults in the
the number of limbs affected. For instance,affected mus- United States have CP,and it is newly diagnosed in about
cles in one limb is monoplegia,both arms or both legs is 6,000 infants and young children each year. The inci-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 701
Cerebral
palsy
dence of CP has not changed much in the last 20–30 measles,now rare in the United States),cytomegalovirus
years. Ironically,advances in medicine have decreased (CMV),and toxoplasmosis. Each of these infections is
the incidence from some causes,Rh disease for example, considered a risk to the fetus only if the mother contracts
but increased it from others, notably, prematurity and it for the first time during that pregnancy. Even in those
multiple pregnancies. No particular ethnic groups seem cases, though, most babies will be born normal. Most
to be at higher risk for CP. However,people of disadvan- women are immune to all three infections by the time
taged background are at higher risk due to poorer access they reach childbearing age,but a woman’s immune sta-
to proper prenatal care and advanced medical services. tus can be determined using the so-called TORCH (for
Toxoplasmosis,Rubella,Cytomegalovirus,and Herpes)
test before or during pregnancy.
Causes and symptoms
Just as a strokecan cause neurologic damage in an
As noted,CP has many causes,making a discussion
adult,so too can this type of event occur in the fetus. A
of the genetics of CP complicated. A number of heredi-
burst blood vessel in the brain followed by uncontrolled
tary/genetic syndromes have signs and symptoms similar
bleeding (coagulopathy),known as intracerebral hemor-
to CP,but usually also have problems not typical of CP.
rhage,could cause a fetal stroke,or a cerebral blood ves-
Put another way, some hereditary conditions “mimic”
sel could be obstructed by a clot (embolism). Infants who
CP. Isolated CP,meaning CP that is not a part of some
later develop CP,along with their mothers,are more like-
other syndrome or disorder,is usually not inherited.
ly than other mother-infant pairs to test positive for fac-
It might be possible to group the causes of CP into tors that put them at increased risk for bleeding episodes
those that are genetic and those that are non-genetic,but or blood clots. Some coagulation disordersare strictly
most would fall somewhere in between. Grouping causes hereditary,but most have a more complicated basis.
into those that occur during pregnancy (prenatal),those
A teratogen is any substance to which a woman is
that happen around the time of birth (perinatal),and those
exposed that has the potential to harm the embryo or
that occur after birth (postnatal),is preferable. CP related
fetus. Links between a drug or other chemical exposure
to premature birth and multiple pregnancies (twins,
during pregnancy and a risk for CP are difficult to prove.
triplets,etc.,not “many pregnancies”) is somewhat differ-
However, any substance that might affect fetal brain
ent and considered separately.
development, directly or indirectly, could increase the
risk for CP. Furthermore,any substance that increases the
Prenatal causes risk for premature delivery and low birth weight,such as
alcohol,tobacco,or cocaine,among others,might indi-
Although much has been learned about human
rectly increase the risk for CP.
embryology in the last couple of decades, a great deal
remains unknown. Studying prenatal human develop-
The fetus receives all nutrients and oxygen from
ment is difficult because the embryo and fetus develop in
blood that circulates through the placenta. Therefore,
a closed environment—the mother’s womb. However,
anything that interferes with normal placental function
the relatively recent development of a number of prenatal
might adversely affect development of the fetus,includ-
tests has opened a window on the process. Add to that
ing the brain, or might increase the risk for premature
more accurate and complete evaluations of newborns,
delivery. Structural abnormalities of the placenta,prema-
especially those with problems,and a clearer picture of
ture detachment of the placenta from the uterine wall
what can go wrong before birth is possible.
(abruption),and placental infections (chorioamnionitis)
The complicated process of brain development before are thought to pose some risk for CP.
birth is susceptible to many chance errors that can result in
Certain conditions in the mother during pregnancy
abnormalities of varying degrees. Some of these errors
might pose a risk to fetal development leading to CP.
will result in structural anomalies of the brain,while oth-
Women with autoimmune anti-thyroid or anti-phospho-
ers may cause undetectable,but significant,abnormalities
lipid (APA) antibodies are at slightly increased risk for
in how the cerebral cortex is “wired.”An abnormality in
CP in their children. A potentially important clue uncov-
structure or wiring is sometimes hereditary, but is most
ered recently points toward high levels of cytokines in
often due to chance, or a cause unknown at this time.
the maternal and fetal circulation as a possible risk for
Whether and how much genetics played a role in a particu-
CP. Cytokines are proteins associated with inflammation,
lar brain abnormality depends to some degree on the type
such as from infection or autoimmune disorders,and
of anomaly and the form of CP it causes.
they may be toxic to neurons in the fetal brain. More
Several maternal-fetal infections are known to research is needed to determine the exact relationship,if
increase the risk for CP, including rubella (German any,between high levels of cytokines in pregnancy and
702 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yslap
larbereC
KEY TERMS
Asphyxia—Lack of oxygen. In the case of cerebral Dorsal rhizotomy—A surgical procedure that cuts
palsy, lack of oxygen to the brain. nerve roots to reduce spasticity in affected muscles.
Ataxia—A deficiency of muscular coordination, Dyskinesia—Impaired ability to make voluntary
especially when voluntary movements are attempt- movements.
ed, such as grasping or walking.
Hemiplegia—Paralysis of one side of the body.
Athetosis—A condition marked by slow, writhing,
Hypotonia—Reduced or diminished muscle tone.
involuntary muscle movements.
Quadriplegia—Paralysis of all four limbs.
Cerebral palsy—Movement disability resulting from
nonprogressive brain damage. Serial casting—A series of casts designed to gradu-
ally move a limb into a more functional position.
Coagulopathy—A disorder in which blood is either
too slow or too quick to coagulate (clot). Spastic—A condition in which the muscles are
rigid, posture may be abnormal, and fine motor
Contracture—A tightening of muscles that prevents
control is impaired.
normal movement of the associated limb or other
body part. Spasticity—Increased mucle tone, or stiffness,
which leads to uncontrolled, awkward movements.
Cytokine—A protein associated with inflammation
that, at high levels, may be toxic to nerve cells in Static encephalopathy—A disease of the brain that
the developing brain. does not get better or worse.
Diplegia—Paralysis affecting like parts on both Tenotomy—A surgical procedure that cuts the ten-
sides the body, such as both arms or both legs. don of a contracted muscle to allow lengthening.
CP. A woman has some risk of developing the same com- is sometimes referred to as acquired CP,but this is only
plications in more than one pregnancy,slightly increas- accurate for those cases caused by infection or trauma.
ing the risk for more than one child with CP.
Incompatibility between the Rh blood types of
Serious physical trauma to the mother during preg-
mother and child (mother Rh negative,baby Rh positive)
nancy could result in direct trauma to the fetus as well,or
can result in severe anemia in the baby (erythroblastosis
injuries to the mother could compromise the availability
fetalis). This may lead to other complications,including
of nutrients and oxygen to the developing fetal brain.
severe jaundice,which can cause CP. Rh disease in the
newborn is now rare in developed countries due to rou-
Perinatal causes tine screening of maternal blood type and treatment of
pregnancies at risk. The routine,effective treatment of
Birth asphyxia significant enough to result in CP is
jaundice due to other causes has also made it an infre-
now uncommon in developed countries. Tight nuchal
quent cause of CP in developed countries. Rh blood type
cord (umbilical cord around the baby’s neck) and pro-
poses a risk for recurrence of Rh disease if treatment is
lapsed cord (cord delivered before the baby) are possible
not provided.
causes of birth asphyxia,as are bleeding and other com-
plications associated with placental abruptionand pla-
Serious infections that affect the brain directly,such
centa previa(placenta lying over the cervix).
as meningitisand encephalitis,may cause irreversible
Infection in the mother is sometimes not passed to damage to the brain,leading to CP. A seizure disorder
the fetus through the placenta,but is transmitted to the early in life may cause CP, or may be the product of a
baby during delivery. Any such infection that results in hidden problem that causes CP in addition to seizures.
serious illness in the newborn has the potential to pro- Unexplained (idiopathic) seizures are hereditary in only
duce some neurological damage. a small percentage of cases. Although rare in infants born
healthy at or near term, intracerebral hemorrhage and
Postnatal causes brain embolism,like fetal stroke,are sometimes genetic.
The remaining 15% of CP is due to neurologic Physical trauma to an infant or child resulting in
injury sustained after birth. CP that has a postnatal cause brain injury, such as from abuse, accidents, or near
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 703
Cerebral
palsy
drowning/suffocation,might cause CP. Likewise,inges- •seizure disorders
tion of a toxic substance such as lead,mercury,poisons,
•visual impairment
or certain chemicals could cause neurological damage.
Accidental overdose of certain medications might also •hearing loss
cause similar damage to the central nervous system. •speech impairment (dysarthria)
By definition,the defect in cerebral function causing •abnormal sensation and perception
CP is nonprogressive. However, the symptoms of CP
These problems may have a greater impact on a
often change over time. Most of the symptoms of CP
child’s life than the physical impairments of CP,although
relate in some way to the aberrant control of muscles. To
not all children with CP are affected by other problems.
review, CP is categorized first by the type of move-
Many infants and children with CP have growth impair-
ment/postural disturbance(s) present,then by a descrip-
ment. About one-third of individuals with CP have moder-
tion of which limbs are affected,and finally by the sever-
ate-to-severe mental retardation,one-third have mild men-
ity of motor impairment. For example,spastic diplegia
tal retardation,and one-third have normal intelligence.
refers to continuously tight muscles that have no volun-
tary control in both legs, while athetoid quadraparesis
describes uncontrolled writhing movements and muscle Diagnosis
weakness in all four limbs. These three-part descriptions
The signs of CP are not usually noticeable at birth.
are helpful in providing a general picture,but cannot give
Children normally progress through a predictable set of
a complete description of any one person with CP. In
developmental milestones through the first 18 months of
addition, the various “forms” of CP do not occur with
life. Children with CP, however, tend to develop these
equal frequency—spastic diplegia is seen in more indi-
skills more slowly because of their motor impairments,
viduals than is athetoid quadraparesis. CP can also be
and delays in reaching milestones are usually the first
loosely categorized as mild, moderate, or severe, but
symptoms of CP. Babies with more severe cases of CP
these are very subjective terms with no firm boundaries
are usually diagnosed earlier than others.
between them.
Selected developmental milestones,and the ages for
A muscle that is tensed and contracted is hypertonic,
normally acquiring them,are given below. If a child does
while excessively loose muscles are hypotonic. Spastic,
not acquire the skill by the age shown in parentheses,
hypertonic muscles can cause serious orthopedic prob-
there is some cause for concern.
lems,including scoliosis(spine curvature),hip disloca-
tion, or contractures. A contracture is shortening of a •sits well unsupported—six months (eight–10 months)
muscle,aided sometimes by a weak-opposing force from
•babbles—six months (eight months)
a neighboring muscle. Contractures may become perma-
nent,or “fixed,”without some sort of intervention. Fixed •crawls—nine months (12 months)
contractures may cause postural abnormalities in the •finger feeds,holds bottle—nine months (12 months)
affected limbs. Clenched fists and contracted feet (equi-
•walks alone—12 months (15–18 months)
nus or equinovarus) are common in people with CP.
Spasticity in the thighs causes them to turn in and cross •uses one or two words other than dada/mama—12
at the knees,resulting in an unusual method of walking months (15 months)
known as a “scissors gait.”Any of the joints in the limbs
•walks up and down steps—24 months (24–36 months)
may be stiff (immobilized) due to spasticity of the
•turns pages in books; removes shoes and socks—24
attached muscles.
months (30 months)
Athetosis and dyskinesia often occur with spasticity,
Children do not consistently favor one hand over the
but do not often occur alone. The same is true of ataxia.
other before 12–18 months,and doing so may be a sign
It is important to remember that “mild CP” or “severe
that the child has difficulty using the other hand. This
CP”refers not only to the number of symptoms present,
same preference for one side of the body may show up as
but also to the level of involvement of any particular
asymmetric crawling or,later on,favoring one leg while
class of symptoms.
climbing stairs.
Mechanisms that can cause CP are not always
It must be remembered that children normally
restricted to motor-control areas of the brain. Other neu-
progress at somewhat different rates,and slow beginning
rologically based symptoms may include:
accomplishment is often followed by normal develop-
•mental retardation/learning disabilities
ment. Other causes for developmental delay—some
•behavioral disorders benign,some serious—should be excluded before con-
704 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yslap
larbereC
sidering CP as the answer. CP is nonprogressive,so con- um),and baclofen (Lioresal) may be prescribed. Botu-
tinued loss of previously acquired milestones indicates linum toxin (Botox),a newer and highly effective treat-
that CP is not the cause of the problem. ment,is injected directly into the affected muscles. Alco-
hol or phenol injections into the nerve controlling the
No one test is diagnostic for CP,but certain factors
muscle are another option. Multiple medications are
increase suspicion. The Apgar score measures a baby’s
available to control seizures,and athetosis can be treated
condition immediately after birth. Babies that have low
using medications such as trihexyphenidyl HCl (Artane)
Apgar scores are at increased risk for CP. Presence of
and benztropine (Cogentin).
abnormal muscle tone or movements may indicate CP,as
may the persistence of infantile reflexes. Imaging of the
Surgery
brain using ultrasound,x rays,MRI,and/or CT scans may
reveal a structural anomaly. Some brain lesions associated Fixed contractures are usually treated with either
with CP include scarring,cysts,expansion of the cerebral serial casting or surgery. The most commonly used surgi-
ventricles (hydrocephalus),periventricular leukomalacia cal procedures are tenotomy,tendon transfer,and dorsal
(an abnormality of the area surrounding the ventricles), rhizotomy. In tenotomy,tendons of the affected muscle
areas of dead tissue (necrosis),and evidence of an intra- are cut and the limb is cast in a more normal position
cerebral hemorrhage or blood clot. Blood and urine bio- while the tendon regrows. Alternatively,tendon transfer
chemical tests,as well as genetic tests,may be used to rule involves cutting and reattaching a tendon at a different
out other possible causes,including muscle and peripheral point on the bone to enhance the length and function of
nerve diseases,mitochondrial and metabolic diseases,and the muscle. A neurosurgeon performing dorsal rhizotomy
other inherited disorders. Evaluations by a pediatric devel- carefully cuts selected nerve roots in the spinal cord to
opmental specialist and a geneticist may be of benefit. prevent them from stimulating the spastic muscles. Neu-
rosurgical techniques in the brain such as implanting tiny
electrodes directly into the cerebellum,or cutting a por-
Treatment
tion of the hypothalamus, have very specific uses and
Cerebral palsy cannot be cured,but many of the dis- have had mixed results.
abilities it causes can be managed through planning and
timely care. Treatment for a child with CP depends on the Education
severity,nature,and location of the primary muscular symp-
Parents of a child newly diagnosed with CP are not
toms,as well as any associated problems that might be pre-
likely to have the necessary expertise to coordinate the
sent. Optimal care of a child with mild CP may involve reg-
full range of care their child will need. Although
ular interaction with only a physical therapist and occupa-
knowledgeable and caring medical professionals are
tional therapist,whereas care for a more severely affected
indispensable for developing a care plan,a potentially
child may include visits to multiple medical specialists
more important source of information and advice is
throughout life. With proper treatment and an effective plan,
other parents who have dealt with the same set of diffi-
most people with CP can lead productive,happy lives.
culties. Support groups for parents of children with CP
can be significant sources of both practical advice and
Therapy
emotional support. Many cities have support groups
Spasticity, muscle weakness, coordination, ataxia, that can be located through the United Cerebral Palsy
and scoliosis are all significant impairments that affect the Association,and most large medical centers have spe-
posture and mobility of a person with CP. Physical and cial multidisciplinary clinics for children with develop-
occupational therapists work with the patient,and the fam- mental disorders.
ily,to maximize the ability to move affected limbs,devel-
op normal motor patterns,and maintain posture. “Assistive
Prognosis
technology,” things such as wheelchairs, walkers, shoe
inserts,crutches,and braces,are often required. A speech Cerebral palsy can affect every stage of maturation,
therapist,and high-tech aids such as computer-controlled from childhood through adolescence to adulthood. At
communication devices,can make a tremendous differ- each stage, those with CP, along with their caregivers,
ence in the life of those who have speech impairments. must strive to achieve and maintain the fullest range of
experiences and education consistent with their abilities.
The advice and intervention of various professionals
Medications
remains crucial for many people with CP. Although CP
Before fixed contractures develop,muscle-relaxant itself is not considered a terminal disorder,it can affect a
drugs such as diazepam (Valium), dantrolene (Dantri- person’s lifespan by increasing the risk for certain med-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 705
Cerebral
palsy
ical problems. People with mild cerebral palsy may have National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. 31
near-normal lifespans, but the lifespan of those with Center Drive,MSC 2540,Bldg. 31,Room 8806,Bethes-
more severe forms may be shortened. However, over da,MD 20814. (301) 496-5751 or (800) 352-9424.
90% of infants with CP survive into adulthood. <http://www.ninds.nih.gov>.
National Society of Genetic Counselors. 233 Canterbury Dr.,
The cause of most cases of CP remains unknown, Wallingford,PA 19086-6617. (610) 872-1192. <http://
but it has become clear in recent years that birth difficul- www.nsgc.org/GeneticCounselingYou.asp>.
ties are not to blame in most cases. Rather,developmen- United Cerebral Palsy Association,Inc. (UCP). 1660 L St. NW,
tal problems before birth,usually unknown and generally Suite 700,Washington,DC 20036-5602. (202)776-0406
undiagnosable,are responsible for most cases. The rate or (800)872-5827. <http://www.ucpa.org>.
of survival for preterm infants has leveled off in recent
OTHER
years,and methods to improve the long-term health of
“Cerebral Palsy Information Page.”National Institute of Neu-
these at-risk babies are now being sought. Current
rological Disorders and Stroke.<http://www.ninds.nih.
research is also focusing on the possible benefits of rec-
gov/health_and_medical/pubs/cerebral_palsy.htm>.
ognizing and treating coagulopathies and inflammatory
“Cerebral Palsy:Hope Through Research.”National Institute
disorders in the prenatal and perinatal periods. The use of of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.<http://www.ninds.
magnesium sulfate in pregnant women with preeclamp- nih.gov/health_and_medical/pubs/cerebral_palsyhtr.htm>.
sia or threatened preterm delivery may reduce the risk of
CP in very preterm infants. Finally,the risk of CP can be Scott J. Polzin,MS
decreased through good maternal nutrition,avoidance
of drugs and alcohol during pregnancy,and prevention or
prompt treatment of infections.
Resources Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
BOOKS analysis
Miller,Freema,and Steven J. Bachrach. Cerebral Palsy:A
Complete Guide for Caregiving.Baltimore:Johns Hop- Definition
kins University Press,1995.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is a laboratory
Peacock,Judith. Cerebral Palsy.Mankato,MN:Capstone
Press,2000. test to examine a sample of the fluid surrounding the
Pimm,Paul. Living With Cerebral Palsy.Austin,TX:Raintree brain and spinal cord. This fluid is a clear,watery liquid
Steck-Vaughn Publishers,2000. that protects the central nervous system from injury and
Pincus,Dion. Everything You Need to Know About Cerebral cushions it from the surrounding bone structure. It con-
Palsy.New York:Rosen Publishing Group,Inc.,2000. tains a variety of substances,particularly glucose (sugar),
protein,and white blood cells from the immune system.
PERIODICALS
The fluid is withdrawn through a needle in a procedure
Chambers,Henry G. “Research in Cerebral Palsy.”The Excep-
called a lumbar puncture.
tional Parent29 (July 1999):50.
Myers,Scott M. and Bruce K. Shapiro. “Origins and Causes of
Cerebral Palsy:Symptoms and Diagnosis.”The Excep-
Purpose
tional Parent29 (April 1999):28.
Seppa,Nathan. “Infections may underlie cerebral palsy.”Sci- The purpose of a CSF analysis is to diagnose med-
ence News154 (October 17,1998):244. ical disorders that affect the central nervous system.
Stephenson,Joan. “Cerebral Palsy Clues.”The Journal of the
Some of these conditions include:
American Medical Association280 (21 October 1998):
1298. •viral and bacterial infections,such as meningitisand
encephalitis
ORGANIZATIONS
•tumors or cancers of the nervous system
Epilepsy Foundation of America. 4351 Garden City Dr.,Suite
406,Landover,MD 20785-2267. (301) 459-3700 or (800) •syphilis,a sexually transmitted disease
332-1000. <http://www.epilepsyfoundation.org>.
•bleeding (hemorrhaging) around the brain and spinal
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275 Mamaroneck
Ave.,White Plains,NY 10605. (888) 663-4637. resource- cord
center@modimes.org. <http://www.modimes.org>.
•multiple sclerosis, a disease that affects the myelin
National Easter Seal Society. 230 W. Monroe St.,Suite 1800,
coating of the nerve fibers of the brain and spinal cord
Chicago,IL 60606-4802. (312) 726-6200 or (800) 221-
6827. <http://www.easter-seals.org>. •Guillain-Barré syndrome,an inflammation of the nerves.
706 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisylana
)FSC(
diulf
lanipsorbereC
Precautions Description
In some circumstances,a lumbar puncture to with- The procedure to remove cerebrospinal fluid is
draw a small amount of CSF for analysis may lead to called a lumbar puncture,or spinal tap,because the area
serious complications. Lumbar puncture should be per- of the spinal column used to obtain the sample is in the
formed only with extreme caution,and only if the bene- lumbar spine, or lower section of the back. In rare
fits are thought to outweigh the risks,in certain condi- instances,such as a spinal fluid blockage in the middle of
tions. For example,in people who have blood clotting the back,a doctor may perform a spinal tap in the neck.
(coagulation) or bleeding disorders, lumbar puncture The lower lumbar spine (usually between the vertebrae
can cause bleeding that can compress the spinal cord. If known as L4–5) is preferable because the spinal cord
there is a large brain tumoror other mass,removal of stops near L2,and a needle introduced below this level
CSF can cause the brain to droop down within the skull will miss the spinal cord and encounter only nerve roots,
cavity (herniate),compressing the brain stem and other which are easily pushed aside.
vital structures,and leading to irreversible brain damage
A lumbar puncture takes about 30 minutes. Patients
or death. These problems are easily avoided by check-
can undergo the test in a doctor’s office,laboratory,or
ing blood coagulation through a blood test and by doing
outpatient hospital setting. Sometimes it requires an
a computed tomography scan(CT) or magnetic reso-
inpatient hospital stay. If the patient has spinal arthritis,
nance imaging(MRI) scan before attempting the lum-
is extremely uncooperative,or obese,it may be necessary
bar puncture. In addition,a lumbar puncture procedure
to introduce the spinal needle using x-ray guidance.
should never be performed at the site of a localized skin
infection on the lower back because the infection may In order to get an accurate sample of cerebrospinal
be introduced into the CSF and may spread to the brain fluid,it is critical that a patient is in the proper position.
or spinal cord. The spine must be curved to allow as much space as possi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 707
Cerebrospinal
fluid
(CSF)
analysis
Vertebrae
Spinal cord
Cerebrospinal fluid
During a lumbar puncture,or spinal tap,a procedure in which cerebrospinal fluid is aspirated,the physician inserts a hollow,
thin needle in the space between two vertebrae of the lower back and slowly advances it toward the spine.The cerebrospinal
fluid pressure is then measured and the fluid is withdrawn for laboratory analysis.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
fill the needle as soon as it enters the spinal canal. The
KEY TERMS doctor measures the cerebrospinal fluid pressure with a
special instrument called a manometer and withdraws
Encephalitis—An inflammation or infection of the several vials of fluid for laboratory analysis. The amount
brain and spinal cord caused by a virus or as a of fluid collected depends on the type and number of
complication of another infection. tests needed to diagnose a particular medical disorder.
Guillain-Barré syndrome—An inflammation involv- In some cases,the doctor must remove and reposi-
ing nerves that affect the extremities. The inflamma- tion the needle. This occurs when there is not an even
tion may spread to the face, arms, and chest. flow of fluid,the needle hits bone or a blood vessel,or
the patient reports sharp,unusual pain.
Immune system—Protects the body against infec-
tion.
Preparation
Manometer—A device used to measure fluid pres-
sure. Patients can go about their normal activities before a
Meningitis—An infection or inflammation of the lumbar puncture. Experts recommend that patients relax
membranes or tissues that cover the brain and before the procedure to release any muscle tension,since
spinal cord, and caused by bacteria or a virus. the lumbar puncture needle must pass through muscle
tissue before it reaches the spinal canal. A patient’s level
Multiple sclerosis—A disease that destroys the
of relaxation before and during the procedure plays a
covering (myelin sheath) of nerve fibers of the
critical role in the test’s success.
brain and spinal cord.
Spinal canal—The cavity or hollow space within
Aftercare
the spine that contains cerebrospinal fluid.
After the procedure,the doctor covers the site of the
Vertebrae—The bones of the spinal column. There
puncture with a sterile bandage. Patients must avoid sit-
are 33 along the spine, with five (called L1-L5)
ting or standing and remain lying down for as long as six
making up the lower lumbar region.
hours after the lumbar puncture. They should also drink
plenty of fluid to help prevent lumbar puncture
headache,which is discussed in the next section.
ble between the lower vertebrae,or bones of the back,for
the doctor to insert a lumbar puncture needle between the
Risks
vertebrae and withdraw a small amount of fluid. The most
For most people,the most common side effect after
common position is for the patient to lie on his or her side
the removal of CSF is a headache. This occurs in
with the back at the edge of the exam table,head and chin
10–30% of adult patients and in up to 40% of children. It
bent down,knees drawn up to the chest,and arms clasped
is caused by a decreased CSF pressure related to a small
around the knees. (Small infants and people who are obese
leak of CSF through the puncture site. These headaches
may need to curve their spines in a sitting position.) Peo-
usually are a dull pain, although some people report a
ple should talk to their doctor if they have any questions
throbbing sensation. A stiff neck and nausea may accom-
about their position because it is important to be comfort-
pany the headache. Lumbar puncture headaches typically
able and to remain still during the entire procedure. In fact,
begin within two days after the procedure and persist
the doctor will explain the procedure to the patient (or
from a few days to several weeks or months.
guardian) so that the patient can agree in writing to have it
done (informed consent). If the patient is anxious or unco- Since an upright position worsens the pain,patients
operative,a short-acting sedative may be given. with a lumbar puncture headache can control the pain by
lying in a flat position and taking a prescription or non-
During a lumbar puncture, the doctor drapes the
prescription pain relief medication,preferably one con-
back with a sterile covering that has an opening over the
taining caffeine. In rare cases,the puncture site leak is
puncture site and cleans the skin surface with an antisep-
“patched”using the patient’s own blood.
tic solution. Patients receive a local anesthetic to mini-
People should talk to their doctor about complica-
mize any painin the lower back.
tions from a lumbar puncture. In most cases,this test to
The doctor inserts a hollow,thin needle in the space analyze CSF is a safe and effective procedure. Some
between two vertebrae of the lower back and slowly patients experience pain,difficulty urinating,infection,
advances it toward the spine. A steady flow of clear cere- or leakage of cerebrospinal fluid from the puncture site
brospinal fluid,normally the color of water,will begin to after the procedure.
708 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisylana
)FSC(
diulf
lanipsorbereC
Normal results ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Neurology. 1080 Montreal Ave.,St.
Normal CSF is clear and colorless. It may be cloudy
Paul,MN 55116. (612) 695-1940. <http://www.aan.com>.
in infections; straw- or yellow-colored if there is excess
protein, as may occur with cancer or inflammation; Martha Floberg Robbins
blood-tinged if there was recent bleeding; or yellow to
brown (xanthochromic) if caused by an older instance of Cerebrovascular accident see Stroke
bleeding.
Cerebrovascular amyloidosis see Cerebral
A series of laboratory tests analyze the CSF for a
amyloid angiopathy
variety of substances to rule out possible medical disor-
ders of the central nervous system. The following are
normal values for commonly tested substances:
•CSF pressure:50–180 mmHO
2
•glucose:40–85 mg/dL
Cerumen impaction
•protein:15–50 mg/dL
Definition
•leukocytes (white blood cells) total less than 5 per mL
Cerumen impaction is a condition in which earwax
•lymphocytes:60–70%
has become tightly packed in the external ear canal to the
•monocytes:30–50%
point that the canal is blocked.
•neutrophils:none
Normally, there are no red blood cells in the CSF Description
unless the needle passes though a blood vessel on route
Cerumen impaction develops when earwax accumu-
to the CSF. If this is the case,there should be more red
lates in the inner part of the ear canal and blocks the
blood cells in the first tube collected than in the last.
eardrum. It affects between 2–6% of the general popula-
tion in the United States. Impaction does not happen
Abnormal results under normal circumstances because cerumen is pro-
duced by glands in the outer part of the ear canal; it is not
Abnormal test result values in the pressure or any of
produced in the inner part. The cerumen traps sand or
the substances found in the cerebrospinal fluid may sug-
dust particles before they reach the ear drum. It also pro-
gest a number of medical problems including a tumor or
tects the outer part of the ear canal because it repels
spinal cord obstruction; hemorrhaging or bleeding in the
water. The slow movement of the outer layer of skin of
central nervous system; infection from bacterial,viral,or
the ear canal carries cerumen toward the outer opening of
fungal microorganisms; or an inflammation of the
the ear. As the older cerumen reaches the opening of the
nerves. It is important for patients to review the results of
ear,it dries out and falls away.
a cerebrospinal fluid analysis with their doctor and to
discuss any treatment plans.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
Resources
BOOKS Cerumen is most likely to become impacted when it
Anderson,Kenneth,ed. Mosby’s Medical,Nursing and Allied is pushed against the eardrum by cotton-tipped applica-
Health Dictionary.4th ed. Chicago:Mosby Year-Book, tors, hair pins, or other objects that people put in their
Inc.,1994. ears; and when it is trapped against the eardrum by a
Conn’s Current Therapy,1996.Ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadel- hearing aid. Less common causes of cerumen impaction
phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996. include overproduction of earwax by the glands in the
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
ear canal,or an abnormally shaped ear canal.
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
“General Problems in Infectious Diseases.”In Current Medical
Symptoms
Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed. Stephen
McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1995.
The most important symptom of cerumen impaction
PERIODICALS is partial loss of hearing. Other symptoms are itching,
Lederman,Richard J. “Lumbar Puncture:Essential Steps to a tinnitus(noise or ringing in the ears),a sensation of full-
Safe and Valid Procedure.”Geriatrics(June 1996):51-55. ness in the ear,and pain.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 709
Cerumen
impaction
Diagnosis effect of Cerumenex is an allergic skin reaction. Over-
the-counter wax removal products include Debrox or
The diagnosis of impacted cerumen is usually made
Murine Ear Drops. A 3% solution of hydrogen peroxide
by examining the ear canal and eardrum with an oto-
may also be used. These products are less likely to irri-
scope,an instrument with a light attached that allows the
tate the skin of the ear.
doctor to look into the canal.
Prognosis
Treatment
In most cases, impacted cerumen is successfully
Irrigation is the most common method of removing
removed by irrigation with no lasting side effects. Irriga-
impacted cerumen. It involves washing out the ear canal
tion can, however, lead to infection of the outer or the
with water from a commercial irrigator or a syringe with
middle ear if the patient has a damaged or absent ear
a catheter attached. Although some doctors use Water
drum. Patients who try to remove earwax themselves
Piks to remove cerumen,most do not recommend them
with hair pins or similar objects run the risk of perforat-
because the stream of water is too forceful and may dam-
ing the ear drum or damaging the fragile skin covering
age the eardrum. The doctor may add a small amount of
the ear canal,causing bleeding and the risk of infection.
alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other antiseptic. The
water must be close to body temperature; if it is too cold
Prevention
or too warm, the patient may feel dizzy or nauseated.
The best method of cleaning the external ear is to
After the ear has been irrigated, the doctor will apply
wipe the outer opening with a damp washcloth folded over
antibiotic ear drops to protect the ear from infection.
the index finger, without going into the ear canal itself.
Irrigation should not be used to remove cerumen if
Two techniques have been recommended to prevent ceru-
the patient’s eardrum is ruptured or missing; if the patient
men from reaccumulating in the ear. The patient may place
has a history of chronic otitis media (inflammation of
two or three drops of mineral oil into each ear once a
the middle ear) or a myringotomy (cutting the eardrum to
week, allow it to remain for two or three minutes, and
allow fluid to escape from the middle ear); or if the
rinse it out with warm water; or place two drops of Dome-
patient has hearing in only one ear.
boro otic solution in each ear once a week after showering.
If irrigation cannot be used or fails to remove the
Patients who wear hearing aidsshould have their ears
cerumen,the patient is referred to an ear,nose,and throat
examined periodically for signs of cerumen accumulation.
(ENT) specialist. The specialist can remove the wax with
a vacuum device or a curette, which is a small scoop- Resources
shaped surgical instrument.
BOOKS
Some doctors prescribe special ear drops, such as Jackler,Robert K.,MD,and Michael J. Kaplan,MD. “Ceru-
Cerumenex,to soften the wax. The most common side men Impaction.”In “Ear,Nose,& Throat,”Current Med-
710 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitcapmi
nemureC
Syringe Eardrum
Wax
Stream of fluid
Ear wax is removed by flushing the ear canal with warm fluid.(Illustration by Argosy, Inc.)
Description
In the United States,cervical cancer is the fifth most
common cancer among women aged 35–54,and the third
most common cancer of the female reproductive tract. In
some developing countries,it is the most common type
of cancer. It generally begins as an abnormality in the
cells on the outside of the cervix. The cervix is the lower
part or neck of the uterus (womb). It connects the body
of the uterus to the vagina (birth canal).
Approximately 90% of cervical cancers are squamous
cell carcinomas. This type of cancer originates in the thin,
flat,squamous cells on the surface of the ectocervix,the
part of the cervix that is next to the vagina. (Squamous
cells are the thin,flat cells of the surfaces of the skin and
cervix and linings of various organs.) Another 10% of cer-
vical cancers are of the adenocarcinoma type. This cancer
originates in the mucus-producing cells of the inner or
endocervix,near the body of the uterus. Occasionally,the
cancer may have characteristics of both types and is called
adenosquamous carcinoma or mixed carcinoma.
The initial changes that may occur in some cervical
cells are not cancerous. However, these precancerous
cells form a lesion called dysplasia or a squamous
ical Diagnosis & Treatment 2001. 40th ed. Ed. L. M. Tier- intraepithelial lesion (SIL), since it occurs within the
ney,Jr.,MD,et al. New York:Lange Medical
epithelial or outer layer of cells. These abnormal cells
Books/McGraw-Hill,2001.
can also be described as cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
“External Ear:Obstructions.”In The Merck Manual of Diagno-
(CIN). Moderate to severe dysplasia may be called carci-
sis and Therapy,ed. Mark H. Beers,MD,and Robert
noma in situ or non-invasive cervical cancer.
Berkow,MD. Whitehouse Station,NJ:Merck Research
Laboratories,1999. Dysplasia is a common condition and the abnormal
cells often disappear without treatment. However,these
PERIODICALS
precancerous cells can become cancerous. This may take
Brownson,Paul J.,MD. “Cerumen Management.”Update:The
Newsletter of the Council for Accreditation in Occupa- years,although it can happen in less than a year. Eventu-
tional Hearing Conservation11,(no. 4),(Winter 2000- ally,the abnormal cells start to grow uncontrollably into
2001). the deeper layers of the cervix,becoming an invasive cer-
vical cancer.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Otolaryngology,Head and Neck Surgery. Although cervical cancer used to be one of the most
1 Prince Street,Alexandria,VA 22314. (703) 836-4444. common causes of cancer death among American
women,in the past 40 years there has been a 75% decrease
Rebecca J. Frey,PhD in mortality. This is primarily due to routine screening
with Pap tests (Pap smear),to identify precancerous and
Cervical biopsy see Cervical conization early-invasive stages of cervical cancer. With treatment,
these conditions have a cure rate of nearly 100%.
Worldwide,there are more than 400,000 new cases
of cervical cancer diagnosed each year. The American
Cancer Society (ACS) estimates that there will be 12,900
Cervical cancer new cases of invasive cervical cancer diagnosed in the
United States in 2001. More than one million women
Definition will be diagnosed with a precancerous lesion or non-
invasive cancer of the cervix.
Cervical canceris a disease in which the cells of the
cervix become abnormal and start to grow uncontrol- Older women are at the highest risk for cervical can-
lably,forming tumors. cer. Although girls under the age of 15 rarely develop this
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 711
Cervical
cancer
KEY TERMS
Cerumen—The medical term for earwax.
Curette—A small scoop-shaped surgical instru-
ment that can be used to remove cerumen if irriga-
tion does not work or cannot be used.
Impaction—A condition in which earwax has
become tightly packed in the outer ear to the point
that the external ear canal is blocked.
Irrigation—The technique of removing cerumen
from the ear canal by flushing it with water.
Myringotomy—Surgical cutting of the ear drum to
allow fluid to escape from the middle ear.
Otitis media—Inflammation of the middle ear.
Patients who have had recurrent otitis media
should not have cerumen removed by irrigation.
Tinnitus—A sensation of noise or ringing in the ears.
Tinnitus may be a symptom of cerumen impaction.
cancer,the risk factor begins to increase in the late teens. Diagnosis
Rates for carcinoma in situ peak between the ages of 20
The Pap test
and 30. In the United States, the incidence of invasive
cervical cancer increases rapidly with age for African Most often,cervical cancer is first detected with a
American women over the age of 25. The incidence rises Pap test that is performed as part of a regular pelvic
more slowly for Caucasian women. However, women examination. The vagina is spread with a metal or plastic
over age 65 account for more than 25% of all cases of instrument called a speculum. A swab is used to remove
invasive cervical cancer. mucus and cells from the cervix. This sample is sent to a
laboratory for microscopic examination.
The incidence of cervical cancer is highest among
poor women and among women in developing countries. The Pap test is a screening tool rather than a diag-
In the United States,the death rates from cervical cancer nostic tool. It is very efficient at detecting cervical
are higher among Hispanic, Native American, and abnormalities. The Bethesda System commonly is used
African American women than among Caucasian to report Pap test results. A negative test means that no
women. These groups of women are much less likely to abnormalities are present in the cervical tissue. A posi-
receive regular Pap tests. Therefore,their cervical can- tive Pap test describes abnormal cervical cells as low-
cers usually are diagnosed at a much later stage,after the grade or high-grade SIL, depending on the extent of
cancer has spread to other parts of the body. dysplasia. About 5–10% of Pap tests show at least mild
abnormalities. However,a number of factors other than
cervical cancer can cause abnormalities, including
Causes and symptoms
inflammation from bacteria or yeast infections. A few
Human papilloma virus months after the infection is treated, the Pap test is
repeated.
Infection with the common human papilloma virus
(HPV) is a cause of approximately 90% of all cervical
Biopsy
cancers. There are more than 80 types of HPV. About 30
of these types can be transmitted sexually, including Following an abnormal Pap test, a colposcopy is
those that cause genital warts(papillomas). About half usually performed. The physician uses a magnifying
of the sexually transmitted HPVs are associated with cer- scope to view the surface of the cervix. The cervix may
vical cancer. These “high-risk”HPVs produce a protein be coated with an iodine solution that causes normal cells
that can cause cervical epithelial cells to grow uncontrol- to turn brown and abnormal cells to turn white or yellow.
lably. The virus makes a second protein that interferes This is called a Schiller test. If any abnormal areas are
with tumor suppressors that are produced by the human observed, a colposcopic biopsy may be performed. A
immune system. The HPV-16 strain is thought to be a biopsy is the removal of a small piece of tissue for micro-
cause of about 50% of cervical cancers. scopic examination by a pathologist.
More than six million women in the United States Other types of cervical biopsies may be performed.
have persistent HPV infections, for which there is no An endocervical curettage is a biopsy in which a narrow
cure. Nevertheless,most women with HPV do not devel- instrument called a curette is used to scrape tissue from
op cervical cancer. inside the opening of the cervix. A cone biopsy, or
conization,is used to remove a cone-shaped piece of tis-
Symptoms of invasive cervical cancer sue from the cervix. In a cold knife cone biopsy,a surgi-
cal scalpel or laser is used to remove the tissue. A loop
Most women do not have symptoms of cervical can-
electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) is a cone
cer until it has become invasive. At that point,the symp-
biopsy using a wire that is heated by an electrical cur-
toms may include:
rent. Cone biopsies can be used to determine whether
•unusual vaginal discharge abnormal cells have invaded below the surface of the
cervix. They also can be used to treat many precancers
•light vaginal bleeding or spots of blood outside of nor-
and very early cancers. Biopsies may be performed with
mal menstruation
a local or general anesthetic. They may cause cramping
•painor vaginal bleeding with sexual intercourse and bleeding.
•post-menopausal vaginal bleeding
Diagnosing the stage
Once the cancer has invaded the tissue surrounding
the cervix,a woman may experience pain in the pelvic Following a diagnosis of cervical cancer, various
region and heavy bleeding from the vagina. procedures may be used to stage the disease (determine
712 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnac
lacivreC
how far the cancer has spread). For example,additional •Stage IA1: Invasion area is less than 3 mm (0.13 in)
pelvic exams may be performed under anesthesia. deep and 7 mm (0.33 in) wide
There are several procedures for determining if cer- •Stage IA2:Invasion area is 3–5 mm (0.13–0.2 in) deep
vical cancer has invaded the urinary tract. With cys- and less than 7 mm (0.33 in) wide
toscopy,a lighted tube with a lens is inserted through the
•Stage IB:Cancer can be seen without a microscope or is
urethra (the urine tube from the bladder to the exterior)
deeper than 5 mm (0.2 in) or wider than 7 mm (0.33 in)
and into the bladder to examine these organs for cancer-
•Stage IB1:Cancer is no larger than 4 cm (1.6 in)
ous cells. Tissue samples may be removed for micro-
scopic examination by a pathologist. Intravenous urog- •Stage IB2:Stage IB cancer is larger than 4 cm (1.6 in)
raphy(intravenous pyelogram or IVP) is an x ray of the
•Stage II:Cancer has spread from the cervix but is con-
urinary system, following the injection of special dye.
fined to the pelvic region
The kidneys remove the dye from the bloodstream and
the dye passes into the ureters (the tubes from the kid- •Stage IIA:Cancer has spread to the upper region of the
neys to the bladder) and bladder. IVP can detect a vagina,but not to the lower one-third of the vagina
blocked ureter, caused by the spread of cancer to the •Stage IIB:Cancer has spread to the parametrial tissue
pelvic lymph nodes (small glands that are part of the adjacent to the cervix
immune system).
•Stage III:Cancer has spread to the lower one-third of
A procedure called proctoscopy or sigmoidoscopyis the vagina or to the wall of the pelvis and may be
similar to cystoscopy. It is used to determine whether the blocking the ureters
cancer has spread to the rectum or lower large intestine.
•Stage IIIA:Cancer has spread to the lower vagina but
Computed tomography (CT or CAT) scans, ultra- not to the pelvic wall
sound,or other imaging techniques may be used to deter-
•Stage IIIB:Cancer has spread to the pelvic wall and/or
mine the spread of cancer to various parts of the body.
is blocking the flow of urine through the ureters to the
With a CT scan,an x-ray beam rotates around the body,
bladder
taking images from various angles. It is used to deter-
mine if the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes. Mag- •Stage IV:Cancer has spread to other parts of the body
netic resonance imaging(MRI),which uses a magnetic •Stage IVA:Cancer has spread to the bladder or rectum
field to image the body,sometimes is used for evaluating
•Stage IVB:Cancer has spread to distant organs such as
the spread of cervical cancer. Chest x rays may be used
the lungs
to detect cervical cancer that has spread to the lungs.
•Recurrent:Following treatment,cancer has returned to
the cervix or some other part of the body
Treatment
In addition to the stage of the cancer,factors such as
Following a diagnosis of cervical cancer,the physi- a woman’s age, general health, and preferences may
cian takes a medical history and performs a complete influence the choice of treatment. The exact location of
physical examination. This includes an evaluation of the cancer within the cervix and the type of cervical can-
symptoms and risk factors for cervical cancer. The lymph cer also are important considerations.
nodes are examined for evidence that the cancer has
spread from the cervix. The choice of treatment depends
Treatment of precancer and carcinoma in situ
on the clinical stage of the disease.
Most low-grade SILs that are detected with Pap tests
revert to normal without treatment. Most high-grade
The FIGO system of staging
SILs require treatment. Treatments to remove precancer-
The International Federation of Gynecologists and ous cells include:
Obstetricians (FIGO) system usually is used to stage cer-
•cold knife cone biopsy
vical cancer:
•LEEP
•Stage 0:Carcinoma in situ; non-invasive cancer that is
•cryosurgery (freezing the cells with a metal probe)
confined to the layer of cells lining the cervix
•cauterization or diathermy (burning off the cells)
•Stage I:Cancer that has spread into the connective tis-
sue of the cervix but is confined to the uterus •laser surgery (burning off the cells with a laser beam)
•Stage IA:Very small cancerous area that is visible only These methods also may be used to treat cancer that
with a microscope is confined to the surface of the cervix (stage 0) and other
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 713
Cervical
cancer
early-stage cervical cancers in women who may want to tive material is placed internally,near the tumor. Alterna-
become pregnant. They may be used in conjunction with tively,thin needles may be used to insert the radioactive
other treatments. These procedures may cause bleeding material directly into the tumor.
or cramping. All of these treatments require close follow-
Radiation therapy to the pelvic region can have
up to detect any recurrence of the cancer.
many side effects:
•skin reaction in the area of treatment
Surgery
•fatigue
A simple hysterectomyis used to treat some stages
0 and IA cervical cancers. Usually only the uterus is •upset stomach and loose bowels
removed,although occasionally the fallopian tubes and •vaginal stenosis (narrowing of the vagina due to build-
ovaries are removed as well. The tissues adjoining the up of scar tissue) leading to painful sexual intercourse
uterus,including the vagina,remain intact. The uterus
•premature menopausein young women
may be removed either through the abdomen or the
vagina. •problems with urination
In a radical hysterectomy,the uterus and adjoining
Chemotherapy
tissues,including the ovaries,the upper region (1 in) of
the vagina near the cervix,and the pelvic lymph nodes, Chemotherapy,the use of one or more drugs to kill
are all removed. A radical hysterectomy usually involves cancer cells, is used to treat disease that has spread
abdominal surgery. However,it can be performed vagi- beyond the cervix. Most often it is used following
nally,in combination with a laparoscopic pelvic lymph surgery or radiation treatment. Stages IIB,III,IV,and
node dissection. With laparoscopy, a tube is inserted recurrent cervical cancers usually are treated with a
through a very small surgical incision for the removal of combination of external and internal radiation and
the lymph nodes. These operations are used to treat chemotherapy. The common drugs used for cervical
stages IA2,IB,and IIA cervical cancers,particularly in cancer are cisplatin,ifosfamide,and fluorouracil. These
young women. Following a hysterectomy, the tissue is may be injected or taken by mouth. The National Cancer
examined to see if the cancer has spread and requires Institute recommends that chemotherapy with cisplatin
additional radiation treatment. Women who have had be considered for all women receiving radiation therapy
hysterectomies cannot become pregnant,but complica- for cervical cancer.
tions from a hysterectomy are rare.
The side effects of chemotherapy depend on a num-
If cervical cancer recurs following treatment, a ber of factors,including the type of drug,the dosage,and
pelvic exenteration (extensive surgery) may be per- the length of the treatment. Side effects may include:
formed. This includes a radical hysterectomy,with the
•nausea and vomiting
additional removal of the bladder, rectum, part of the
colon,and/or all of the vagina. Such operations require •fatigue
the creation of new openings for the urine and feces. A •changes in appetite
new vagina may be created surgically. Often the clitoris
•hair loss
and other outer genitals are left intact.
•mouth or vaginal sores
Recovery from a pelvic exenteration may take six
months to two years. This treatment is successful with •infections
40–50% of recurrent cervical cancers that are confined to •menstrual cycle changes
the pelvis. If the recurrent cancer has spread to other
•premature menopause
organs,radiation or chemotherapymay be used to alle-
viate some of the symptoms. •infertility
•bleeding or anemia (low red blood cell count)
Radiation
With the exception of menopause and infertility,
Radiation therapy,which involves the use of high- most of the side effects are temporary.
dosage x rays or other high-energy waves to kill cancer
cells, often is used for treating stages IB, IIA, and IIB
Alternative treatment
cervical cancers, or in combination with surgery. With
external-beam radiation therapy,the rays are focused on Biological therapy sometimes is used to treat cervi-
the pelvic area from a source outside the body. With cal cancer, either alone or in combination with
implant or internal radiation therapy,a pellet of radioac- chemotherapy. Treatment with the immune-system pro-
714 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnac
lacivreC
KEY TERMS
Adenocarcinoma—Cervical cancer that originates Hysterectomy—Removal of the uterus.
in the mucus-producing cells of the inner or endo-
Interferon—Potent immune-defense protein pro-
cervix.
duced by viral-infected cells; used as an anti-cancer
Biopsy—Removal of a small sample of tissue for and anti-viral drug.
examination under a microscope; used for the diag-
nosis and treatment of cervical cancer and precan- Laparoscopy—Laparoscopic pelvic lymph node
cerous conditions. dissection; insertion of a tube through a very small
surgical incision to remove lymph nodes.
Carcinoma in situ—Cancer that is confined to the
cells in which it originated and has not spread to Loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP)—
other tissues. Cone biopsy performed with a wire that is heated
by electrical current.
Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN)—Abnor-
mal cell growth on the surface of the cervix. Lymph nodes—Small round glands, located
Cervix—Narrow, lower end of the uterus forming throughout the body, that filter the lymphatic fluid;
the opening to the vagina. part of the body’s immune defense.
Colposcopy—Diagnostic procedure using a hollow, Pap test—Pap smear; removal of cervical cells to
lighted tube (colposcope) to look inside the cervix screen for cancer.
and uterus.
Pelvic exenteration—Extensive surgery to remove
Conization—Cone biopsy; removal of a cone-
the uterus, ovaries, pelvic lymph nodes, part or all
shaped section of tissue from the cervix for diagno-
of the vagina, and the bladder, rectum, and/or part
sis or treatment.
of the colon.
Dysplasia—Abnormal cellular changes that may
Squamous cells—Thin, flat cells on the surfaces of
become cancerous.
the skin and cervix and linings of various organs.
Endocervical curettage—Biopsy performed with a
curette to scrape the mucous membrane of the cer- Squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL)—Abnormal
vical canal. growth of squamous cells on the surface of the
cervix.
Human papilloma virus (HPV)—Virus that causes
abnormal cell growth (warts or papillomas); some Vaginal stenosis—Narrowing of the vagina due to a
types can cause cervical cancer. build-up of scar tissue.
tein interferon is used to boost the immune response. be curable. The five-year-survival rate for all cervical can-
Biological therapy can cause temporary flu-like symp- cers combined is about 70%. The death rate from cervical
toms and other side effects. cancer continues to decline by about 2% each year.
Women over age 65 account for 40–50% of all deaths
Some research suggests that vitamin A (carotene)
from cervical cancer.
may help to prevent or stop cancerous changes in cells
such as those on the surface of the cervix. Other studies
suggest that vitamins C and E may reduce the risk of
Prevention
cervical cancer.
Viral infections
Most cervical cancers are preventable. More than
Prognosis
90% of women with cervical cancer are infected with
For cervical cancers that are diagnosed in the pre- HPV. HPV infection is the single most important risk
invasive stage,the five-year-survival rate is almost 100%. factor. This is particularly true for young women because
When cervical cancer is detected in the early invasive the cells lining the cervix do not fully mature until age
stages,approximately 91% of women survive five years 18. These immature cells are more susceptible to cancer-
or more. Stage IVB cervical cancer is not considered to causing agents and viruses.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 715
Cervical
cancer
Since HPV is a sexually-transmitted infection,sexu- menopause or some women with hysterectomies contin-
al behaviors can put women at risk for HPV infection ue to require Pap tests.
and cervical cancer. These behaviors include:
The National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early
•sexual intercourse at age 16 or younger Detection Program provides free or low-cost Pap tests
and treatment for women without health insurance,for
•partners who began having intercourse at a young age
older women, and for members of racial and ethnic
•multiple sexual partners
minorities. The program is administered through individ-
•sexual partners who have had multiple partners (“high- ual states,under the direction of the Centers for Disease
risk males”) Control and Prevention.
•a partner who has had a previous sexual partner with
Special concerns
cervical cancer
If a woman is diagnosed with very early-stage (IA)
HPV infection may not produce any symptoms,so
cervical cancer while pregnant,the physician usually will
sexual partners may not know that they are infected.
recommend a hysterectomy after the baby is born. For
However,Pap tests can detect the infection. Condoms do
later-stage cancers,the pregnancyis terminated or the
not necessarily prevent HPV infection.
baby is removed by cesarean sectionas soon as it can
Infection with the human immunodeficiencyvirus
survive outside the womb. This is followed by a hysterec-
(HIV) that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
tomy and/or radiation treatment. For the most advanced
(AIDS) is a risk factor for cervical cancer. Women who
stages of cervical cancer, treatment is initiated despite
test positive for HIV may have impaired immune sys-
the pregnancy.
tems that cannot correct precancerous conditions. Fur-
Many women with cervical cancer have hysterec-
thermore, sexual behavior that puts women at risk for
tomies, which are major surgeries. Although normal
HIV infection,also puts them at risk for HPV infection.
activities,including sexual intercourse,can be resumed
There is some evidence suggesting that another sexually
in four-eight weeks,a woman may have emotional prob-
transmitted virus,the genital herpesvirus,also may be
lems following a hysterectomy. A strong support system
involved in cervical cancer.
can help with these difficulties.
Smoking
Resources
Smoking may double the risk of cervical cancer.
BOOKS
Chemicals produced by tobacco smoke can damage the
Falco,Kristine. Reclaiming Our Lives After Breast and Gyne-
DNA of cervical cells. The risk increases with the number
cologic Cancer.Northvale,NJ:Jason Aronson,Inc.,1998.
of years a woman smokes and the amount she smokes.
Holland,Jimmie C. and Sheldon Lewis. The Human Side of
Cancer:Living with Hope,Coping with Uncertainty.New
Diet and drugs
York:HarperCollins,2000.
Runowicz,Carolyn D.,Jeanne A. Petrek,and Ted S. Gansler.
Dietsthat are low in fruits and vegetables increase
Women and Cancer:A Thorough and Compassionate
the risk of cervical cancer. Women also have an increased
Resource for Patients and their Families.New York:Vil-
risk of cervical cancer if their mothers took the drug
lard Books,1999.
diethylstilbestrol (DES) while they were pregnant. This
Sweeney,Julia. God Said “Ha!”New York:Bantam Books,1997.
drug was given to women between 1940 and 1971 to pre-
vent miscarriages. Some statistical studies have suggest- ORGANIZATIONS
American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Road,N.E.,Atlanta,
ed that the long-term use of oral contraceptives may
GA 30329. (800) ACS-2345. <http://www.cancer.org>.
slightly increase the risk of cervical cancer.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center
for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion.
Pap tests
Mail Stop K-64. 4770 Buford Highway NE,Atlanta,GA
Most cases of cervical cancers are preventable, 30341-3717. (770) 488-4751. (888) 842-6355.
<http://www.cdc.gov/cancer>.
since they start with easily detectable precancerous
EyesOnThePrize.Org. 446 S. Anaheim Hills Road,#108,Ana-
changes. Therefore,the best prevention for cervical can-
heim Hills,CA 92807. <http://www.eyesontheprize.org>.
cer is a regular Pap test. When precancerous changes are
Gynecologic Cancer Foundation. 401 North Michigan Avenue,
detected,appropriate treatment can prevent the develop-
Chicago,IL 60611. (800) 444-4441. (312) 644-6610.
ment of invasive cancer. The ACS recommends that
<http://www.wcn.org/gcf/>.
women have annual Pap tests beginning when they first National Cancer Institute. Public Inquiries Office,Building 31,
start having sex or at age 18. Women who are past Room 10A31,31 Center Drive,MSC 2580,Bethesda,MD
716 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnac
lacivreC
20892-2580. (800) 4-CANCER. <http://www.nci.nih.gov/>.
<http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov>. KEY TERMS
National Cervical Cancer Coalition. 16501 Sherman Way,
Suite #110,Van Nuys,CA 91406. (800) 685-5531. (818)
Biopsy—The removal of a small piece of living tis-
909-3849. <http://www.nccc-online.org/>.
sue for examination under a microscope.
OTHER
PAP test—The short term for Papanicolaou test,
“Cancer of the Cervix.”CancerNet.12 Dec. 2000. National Can-
this procedure tests a smear of cellular material
cer Institute. NIH Publication No. 95-2047. 3 Apr. 2001.
scraped from the cervix and examined under a
<http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/wyntk_pubs/cervix.htm#2>.
“Cervical Cancer.”Cancer Resource Center.American Cancer microscope to detect abnormal cells.
Society. 16 Mar. 2000. 3 Apr. 2001. <http://www3.cancer.
org/cancerinfo/load_cont.asp?ct=8&doc=25&Language=
English>.
“Cervical Cancer.”National Institutes of Health Consensus The patient is given general anesthesia,and the vagina is
Development Conference Statement.1-3 Apr. 1996. 3 Apr. held open with an instrument called a speculum. Using a
2001. <http://text.nlm.nih.gov/nih/cdc/www/102txt.html>.
scalpel or laser the doctor removes a cone-shaped piece
“Cervical Cytology:Evaluation and Management of Abnormali-
of the cervix containing the area with abnormal cells.
ties.”American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
The resulting crater is repaired by stitching flaps of tissue
(ACOG) Techincal Bulletin.Number 183 (August 1993).
over the wound. Alternatively, the wound may be left
open,and heat or freezing is used to stop bleeding.
Lata Cherath
Margaret Alic,Ph.D. Once the tissue has been removed, it is examined
under a microscope for signs of cancer. If cancer is pre-
sent, other tests will be needed. Surgery will be per-
formed to remove the cervix and uterus (hysterectomy)
and other treatments may be used as well. If the abnor-
Cervical conization mal cells are precancerous, a laser can be used to
destroy them.
Definition
Cold knife cone biopsy used to be the preferred
Cervical conization is both a diagnostic and treat- treatment for removing abnormal cells in the cervix.
ment tool used to detect and treat abnormalities of the Now, most cone biopsies are performed using laser
cervix. It is also known as a cone biopsy or cold knife surgery. Cold knife cone biopsy is generally used only
cone biopsy. for special situations. For example, if a biopsy did not
remove all the abnormal cells,the cold knife cone proce-
dure allows the physician to remove what’s left.
Purpose
Cervical conization is performed if the results of a
Aftercare
cervical biopsy have found a precancerous condition in the
cervix. The cervix is the small cylindrical organ at the An overnight stay in the hospital may be required.
lower part of the uterus,which separates the uterus from After the test,the patient may feel some cramps or dis-
the vagina. Cervical conization also may be performed if comfort for about a week. Women should not have sex,
there is an abnormal cervical smear test (PAP test). A use tampons,or douche until after seeing their physician
biopsy is a diagnostic test in which tissue or cells are for a follow up appointment (a week or more after the
removed from the body and examined under a microscope, procedure).
primarily to look for canceror other abnormalities.
Risks
Precautions
Because cone biopsies carry risks such as bleeding
As with any operation that is performed under gen- and problems with subsequent pregnancies, they have
eral anesthesia,the patient must not eat or drink anything been replaced with newer technologies except in a few
for six to eight hours before surgery. circumstances.
About one in 10 women experience bleeding from
Description
the vagina about two weeks after the biopsy. There is
The patient lies on the table with her legs raised in also a slight risk of infection or perforation of the uterus.
stirrups,similar to the position when having a PAP test. In a few women,the cervical canal becomes narrowed or
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 717
Cervical
conization
completely blocked, which can later interfere with the Just as importantly,they also make it possible to turn the
movement of sperm. This can impair a woman’s fertility. head and neck. Over time, these disks slowly become
flattened and less elastic due to everyday wear and tear.
If too much muscle tissue has been removed, the
When this process occurs in the disks of the neck,it is
procedure can lead to an incompetent cervix,which can
referred to as cervical disk disease. Other general terms
be a problem with subsequent pregnancies. An incompe-
for this process include degenerative disk disease and
tent cervix cannot seal properly to maintain a
intervertebral disk disease.
pregnancy. If untreated,the condition increases the odds
of miscarriageor premature labor. Cervical disk disease affects everyone to some
degree, often without causing any bothersome symp-
Cervical conization also may temporarily alter cer-
toms. However,this condition can also lead to specific
vical cells, which can make a Pap smear test hard to
problems related to nerve functioning. For example,the
interpret accurately for three or four months.
outer edge of a disk may tear, allowing the gelatinous
material inside to bulge outward (herniated disk). This
Normal results
can put pressure on nerves that exit the spine. Two adja-
This procedure is only performed if an abnormality cent vertebrae may rub together (sometimes resulting in
is known or suspected. bone spurs) that can also pinch these nerves. In other
cases,the inner part of the ring may push on the spinal
cord itself,which passes through the disk. Any of these
Abnormal results
situations can cause pain and limit movement. While
The presence of precancerous or cancerous cells in symptoms primarily affect the neck,they can also occur
the cervix. in other parts of the body.
Resources Causes and symptoms
BOOKS
Cervical disk disease is a gradual process that occurs
Carlson,Karen J.,Stephanie A. Eisenstat,and Terra Ziporyn.
with aging, though poor posture, repeated lifting, and
The Harvard Guide to Women’s Health.Cambridge,MA:
tobacco use can hasten its course. Symptoms include
Harvard University Press,1996.
pain when moving the neck and limited neck movement.
PERIODICALS The condition can also affect the hand,shoulder,and arm
Clifford,Catherine. “Cervical Cancer:Smart Way to Protect resulting in pain, numbness/tingling, and weakness. If
Yourself.”Redbook189 (Oct. 1997):124-28.
the spinal cord itself is affected, these symptoms may
Israeloff,Roberta. “Your Pap Test is Abnormal:What Does it
occur in the legs. Loss of bowel or bladder control may
Mean?”Cosmopolitan,Apr. 1995,120-22.
also occur.
ORGANIZATIONS
Cancer Information Service. (800) 4-CANCER. <http://www.
Diagnosis
rex.nci.nih.gov>.
Cervical disk disease is typically diagnosed by an
Carol A. Turkington orthopedist or a neurologist. After taking a medical his-
tory and conducting a physical examination,the doctor
will recommend an imaging procedure to gather more
information about the nature of the problem. This may
include a CT scan,an MRI,or myelography. In addi-
Cervical disk disease tion,an electromyogram (EMG) may be used to evalu-
ate the functioning of nerves in the arms,hands,or legs.
Definition
Cervical disk disease is typically covered by medical
Cervical disk disease refers to a gradual deteriora- insurance.
tion of the spongy disks in the top part of the spine.
Treatment
Description
Treatment usually involves physical therapy,several
The spine is made up of 33 bones called vertebrae weeks of drug therapy with nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
separated by spongy rings of elastic material. These matory drugs(NSAIDs),and limited use of a cervical
rings, known as disks, are often compared to shock collar (to reduce neck movement). Neck traction and
absorbers because they help to cushion the vertebrae. heat treatments may also be recommended. In some
718 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
ksid
lacivreC
stretching exercises,maintaining an ideal weight,and quit-
KEY TERMS ting smoking.
Bone spur—An overgrowth of bone. Resources
Cervical—Relating to the top part of the spine that BOOKS
is composed of the seven vertebrae of the neck Dee,Roger,et al. Principles of Orthopaedic Practice.New
and the disks that separate them. York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Computed tomography (CT) scan—An imaging PERIODICALS
procedure that produces a three-dimensional pic- Heckmann,J. G.,et al. “Herniated Cervical Intervertebral
ture of organs or structures inside the body. Discs with Radiculopathy:An Outcome Study of Conser-
vatively or Surgically Treated Patients.”Journal of Spinal
Myelography—An imaging procedure involving
Disorders12 (Oct. 1999):396-401.
the injection of a radioactive dye into the fluid sur-
rounding the spine. A myelography can be used to ORGANIZATIONS
detect herniated disks, nerve root damage, and American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. 6300 North
other problems affecting the cervical spine. River Road,Rosemont,IL 60018-4262. (800) 346-2267.
<http://www.aaos.org>.
Neurologist—A doctor who specializes in disor-
ders of the brain and central nervous system.
Greg Annussek
Orthopedist—A doctor who specializes in disor-
ders of the musculoskeletal system. Cervical osteoarthritis see Cervical
Magnetic resonance imaging—A type of imaging spondylosis
that uses magnetic fields to generate a picture of
internal structures.
Cervical spondylosis
cases,steroids or anesthetic drugs may be injected into
the spinal canal to help alleviate symptoms. Aside from
Definition
these measures,maintaining good posture and placing a
pillow under the neck and head during sleep can be help- Cervical spondylosis refers to common age-related
ful. Treatment may last anywhere from several weeks to changes in the area of the spine at the back of the neck.
three months or more. Neck surgery is not usually With age, the vertebrae (the component bones of the
advised unless other therapies have failed. spine) gradually form bone spurs, and their shock-
absorbing disks slowly shrink. These changes can alter
the alignment and stability of the spine. They may go
Alternative treatment
unnoticed,or they may produce problems related to pres-
Acupuncture, therapeutic massage, and yoga are
sure on the spine and associated nerves and blood ves-
believed by some practitioners of alternative medicine to
sels. This pressure can cause weakness,numbness,and
have generalized pain-relieving effects. However, any
painin various areas of the body. In severe cases,walk-
therapy that involves manipulating the neck is not recom-
ing and other activities may be compromised.
mended and should be approved by the primary doctor
beforehand.
Description
Prognosis As it runs from the brain down the back,the spinal
cord is protected by ringlike bones, called vertebrae,
In most people symptoms go away within three
stacked one upon the other. The vertebrae are not in
months if not sooner. A smaller number may require
direct contact with one another,however. The interven-
surgery to correct the problem.
ing spaces are filled with structures called disks. The
disks are made up of a tough,fibrous outer tissue with an
Prevention inner core of elastic or gel-like tissue.
While some degree of disk degeneration is inevitable, One of the most important functions of disks is pro-
people can reduce their risk by practicing good posture tecting the vertebrae and the nerves and blood vessels
(during sitting, standing, and lifting), performing neck- between the vertebrae. The disks also lend flexibility to
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 719
Cervical
spondylosis
the spinal cord,facilitating movements such as turning away from the spinal cord. Normally, these nerves fit
the head or bending the neck. As people age,disks gradu- comfortably through spaces between the vertebrae.
ally become tougher and more unyielding. Disks also These spaces are called intervertebral foramina. As the
shrink with age, which reduces the amount of padding osteophytes form, they can impinge on this area and
between the vertebrae. gradually make the fit between the vertebrae too snug.
As the amount of padding shrinks, the spine loses The poor fit increases the chances that a minor inci-
stability. The vertebrae react by constructing osteo- dent, such as overdoing normal activities, may place
phytes,commonly known as bone spurs. There are seven excess pressure on the nerve root,sometimes referred to
vertebrae in the neck; development of osteophytes on as a pinched nerve. Pressure may also accumulate as a
these bones is sometimes called cervical osteoarthritis. direct consequence of osteophyte formation. The pres-
Osteophytes may help to stabilize the degenerating back- sure on the nerve root causes severe shooting pain in the
bone and help protect the spinal cord. neck,arms,shoulder,and/or upper back,depending on
By age 50,25–50% of people develop cervical spondy- which nerve roots of the cervical spine are affected. The
losis; by 75 years of age,it is seen in at least 70% of people. pain is often aggravated by movement,but in most cases,
Although shrunken vertebral disks,osteophyte growth,and symptoms resolve within four-six weeks.
other changes in their cervical spine may exist, many of Cervical spondylosis can cause cervical spondylitic
these people never develop significant problems. myelopathy through stenosis- or osteophyte-related pres-
However,about 50% of people over age 50 experience sure on the spinal cord. Spinal stenosisis a narrowing of
neck pain and stiffness due to cervical spondylosis. Of the spinal canal—the area through the center of the verte-
these people,25–40% have at least one episode of cervical bral column occupied by the spinal cord. Stenosis occurs
radiculopathy, a condition that arises when osteophytes because of misaligned vertebrae and out-of-place or
compress nerves between the vertebrae. Another potential degenerating disks. The problems created by spondylosis
problem occurs if osteophytes,degenerating disks,or shift- can be exacerbated if a person has a naturally narrow
ing vertebrae narrow the spinal canal. This pressure com- spinal canal. Pressure against the spinal cord can also be
presses the spinal cord and its blood vessels,causing cervi- created by osteophytes forming on the inner surface of
cal spondylitic myelopathy,a disorder in which large seg- vertebrae and pushing against the spinal cord. Stenosis or
ments of the spinal cord are damaged. This disorder affects osteophytes can compress the spinal cord and its blood
fewer than 5% of people with cervical spondylosis. Symp- vessels,impeding or choking off needed nutrients to the
toms of both cervical spondylitic myelopathy and cervical spinal cord cells; in effect,the cells starve to death.
radiculopathy may be present in some people. With the death of these cells,the functions that they
once performed are impaired. These functions may
Causes and symptoms include conveying sensory information to the brain or
transmitting the brain’s commands to voluntary muscles.
As people age, shrinkage of the vertebral disks
Pain is usually absent,but a person may experience leg
prompts the vertebrae to form osteophytes to stabilize the
numbness and an inability to make the legs move proper-
back bone. However,the position and alignment of the
ly. Other symptoms can include clumsiness and weakness
disks and vertebrae may shift despite the osteophytes.
in the hands,stiffness and weakness in the legs,and spon-
Symptoms may arise from problems with one or more
taneous twitches in the legs. A person’s ability to walk is
disks or vertebrae.
affected,and a wide-legged,shuffling gait is sometimes
Osteophyte formation and other changes do not nec-
adopted to compensate for the lack of sensation in the
essarily lead to symptoms,but after age 50,half of the
legs and the accompanying, realistic fear of falling. In
population experiences occasional neck pain and stiff-
very few cases,bladder control becomes a problem.
ness. As disks degenerate, the cervical spine becomes
less stable,and the neck is more vulnerable to injuries,
including muscle and ligament strains. Contact between Diagnosis
the edges of the vertebrae can also cause pain. In some
Cervical spondylosis is often suspected based on the
people,this pain may be referred—that is,perceived as
symptoms and their history. Careful neurological exami-
occurring in the head,shoulders,or chest,rather than the
nation can help determine which nerve roots are involved,
neck. Other symptoms may include vertigo (a type of
based on the location of the pain and numbness,and the
dizziness) or ringing in the ears.
pattern of weakness and changes in reflex responses. To
The neck pain and stiffness can be intermittent,as confirm the suspected diagnosis, and to rule out other
can symptoms of radiculopathy. Radiculopathy refers to possibilities,imaging tests are ordered. The first test is an
compression on the base, or root, of nerves that lead x ray. X rays reveal the presence of osteophytes,stenosis,
720 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisolydnops
lacivreC
KEY TERMS
Alexander technique—A technique developed by Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—An imaging
Frederick Alexander that focuses on the variations technique that uses a large circular magnet and
in body posture, muscles, and breathing. Defects in radio waves to generate signals from atoms in the
these functions can lead to stress, nervous tension body. These signals are used to construct images of
or possible loss of function. internal structures.
Bone spur—Also called an osteophyte, it is an out- Myelopathy—A disorder in which the tissue of the
growth or ridge that forms on a bone. spinal cord is diseased or damaged.
Cervical—Referring to structures within the neck. Orthosis—An external device, such as a splint or a
Computed tomography myelography—This med- brace, that prevents or assists movement.
ical procedure combines aspects of computed
Osteophyte—Also referred to as bone spur, it is an
tomography scanning and plain-film myelography.
outgrowth or ridge that forms on a bone.
A CT scan is an imaging technique in which cross-
sectional x rays of the body are compiled to create a Radiculopathy—Sometimes referred to as a
three-dimensional image of the body’s internal pinched nerve, it refers to compression of the nerve
structures. Myelography involves injecting a water- root—the part of a nerve between vertebrae. This
soluble substance into the area around the spine to compression causes pain to be perceived in areas to
make it visible on x rays. In computed tomography which the nerve leads.
myelography or CT myelography, the water-soluble
Spine—A term for the backbone that includes the
substance is injected, but the imaging is done with
vertebrae, disks, and spinal cord as a whole.
a CT scan.
Stenosis—A condition in which a canal or other
Disk—A ringlike structure that fits between the ver-
passageway in the body is constricted.
tebrae in the spine to protect the bones, nerves, and
blood vessels. The outer layer is a tough, fibrous tis- Traction—A medical treatment that exerts a pulling
sue, and the inner core is composed of more elastic or extending force. Used for cervical problems, it
tissue. relieves pressure on structures between the verte-
brae and muscular tension.
Feldenkrais method—A therapy based on creating a
good self image by correction and improvements of Vertebrae—The ringlike component bones of the
body movements. spine.
constricted space between the vertebrae, and misalign- efits include that it takes less time to perform and tends to
ment in the cervical spine—in short, an x ray confirms be less expensive than an MRI. A good diagnosis may be
that a person has cervical spondylosis. To demonstrate reached with either a computed tomography myelography
that the condition is causing the symptoms,more details or an MRI, but sometimes complementary information
are needed. Other imaging tests,such as magnetic reso- from both tests is necessary. Nerve conduction velocity,
nance imaging(MRI) and computed tomography myel- electromyogram (EMG),and/or somatosensory evoked
ography,help assess effects of cervical spondylosis on potential testing may help to confirm which nerve roots
associated nerve tissue and blood vessels. are involved.
An MRI may be preferred,because it is a noninva-
Treatment
sive procedure and does not require injecting a contrast
medium as does computed tomography myelography. When possible,conservative treatment of symptoms
MRIs also have greater sensitivity for detecting disk is preferred. Conservative treatment begins with rest—
problems and spinal cord involvement, and the test either restricting normal activities to a less strenuous
allows the physician to create images of a larger area level or bed rest for three to five days. If rest is not ade-
from various angles. However, these images may not quate to relieve symptoms, a cervical orthosis may be
show enough detail about the vertebrae themselves. Com- prescribed.,such as a soft cervical collar or stiffer neck
puted tomography myelography yields a superior image brace to restrict neck movement and shift some of the
of the bones involved in cervical spondylosis. Added ben- head’s weight from the neck to the shoulders. Cervical
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 721
Cervical
spondylosis
tractionmay also be suggested,either at home with the symptoms. For the individuals who do experience prob-
advice of a physical therapist or in a health-care setting. lems,conservative treatment is very effective in manag-
ing the symptoms. Nearly all people with neck pain,
Pain is treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammato-
approximately 75% of persons with radiculopathy,and
ry drugs,such as aspirinor ibuprofen. If these drugs are
up to 50% of people with myelopathy find relief through
ineffective,a short-term prescription for corticosteroids
therapy alone. For the remaining people with radiculopa-
or muscle relaxantsmay be given. For chronic pain,tri-
thy or myelopathy, surgery may be recommended.
cyclic antidepressants can be prescribed. Although these
Surgery is deemed successful in 70–80% of cases.
drugs were developed to treat depression,they are also
effective in treating pain. Once any pain is resolved,
exercises to strengthen neck muscle and preserve flexi- Prevention
bility are prescribed. Since cervical spondylosis is part of the normal
If the pain is severe, a short treatment of epidural agingprocess,not much can be done to prevent it. It may
corticosteroids may be prescribed with discretion. A cor- be possible to ward off some or all of the symptoms by
ticosteroid such as prednisone can be combined with an engaging in regular physical exercise and limiting occu-
anaesthetic and injected with a long needle into the space pational or recreational activities that place pressure on
between the damaged disk and the covering of the nerve the head,neck,and shoulders. The best exercises for the
and spinal cord. Injection into the cervical epidural space health of the cervical spine are noncontact activities,
relieves severe pain that is not managed with convention- such as swimming, walking, or yoga. Once symptoms
al treatment. Frequent use of this treatment is not med- have already developed, the emphasis is on symptom
ically recommended and is used only if the more conser- management rather than prevention.
vative therapy is not effective.
If pain is continuous and does not respond to conser- Resources
vative treatment,surgery may be suggested. Surgery is
BOOKS
usually not recommended for neck pain, but it may be Borenstein,David G.,Sam W. Wiesel,and Scott D. Boden.
necessary to address radiculopathy and myelopathy. “Mechanical Disorders of the Cervical Spine.”In Neck
Surgery is particularly recommended for people who Pain:Medical Diagnosis and Comprehensive Manage-
have already developed moderate to severe symptoms of ment.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
myelopathy, although age or poor health may prohibit Macnab,Ian,and John McCulloch. Neck Ache and Shoulder
that recommendation. The specific details of the surgery Pain.Baltimore:Williams & Wilkins,1994.
depend on the structures involved,but the overall goal is PERIODICALS
to relieve pressure on the nerve root, spinal cord, or Bohlman,Henry H. “Cervical Spondylosis and Myelopathy.”
blood vessels and to stabilize the spine. Instructional Course Lectures44 (1995):81.
McCormack,Bruce M.,and Phillip R. Weinstein. “Cervical
Spondylosis:An Update.”Western Journal of Medicine
Alternative treatment
165 (July/Aug. 1996):43.
Alternative therapy is not meant to replace conven- Neuwirth,Michael,and Joseph Marsicano. “Cervical Spondy-
tional medical treatment,but it can be a useful adjunct. Its losis:Diagnosis,Symptomatology,and Treatment.”
main roles are to relieve tension, manage pain, and Orthopaedic Nursing15,no. 1 (1996):31.
strengthen neck and back muscles. Massage is one way to
relieve tension,and yogaprovides the additional benefit Julia Barrett
of strengthening muscles. Chiropractic and acupunc-
ture have been reported to relieve the pain associated
with disk problems,although great care needs to be taken
to avoid exacerbating them. Practitioners of the Alexan-
der techniqueor the Feldenkrais methodcan provide Cervicitis
instruction on correct posture and exercisethat may help
Definition
prevent further symptoms. Vitamin and mineral supple-
mentation along with herbal therapies and homeopathy Cervicitis is an inflammation of the cervix.
can help build and rebalance the weakened structure.
Description
Prognosis
Cervicitis is a inflammation of the cervix (the open-
The gradual progression of cervical spondylosis ing into the uterus). This inflammation can be chronic
cannot be stopped; however, it doesn’t always cause and may or may not have an identified cause.
722 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
siticivreC
•electrocoagulation
KEY TERMS •laser treatment
Cryotherapy—Freezing the affected tissue.
Prognosis
Electrocoagulation—Using electrical current to
Cervicitis will usually be cured when the course of
cauterize the affected tissue.
therapy is complete. Severe cases,however,may last for
LEEP—Loop Electrosurgical Excision Procedure. a few months,even after the therapy is complete. If the
cervicitis was caused by a sexually transmitted disease,
both partners should be treated with medication.
Prevention
Causes and symptoms
Practicing safe sexual behavior,such as monogamy,
The most common cause of cervicitis is infection,
is one way of lowering the prevalence of cervicitis. In
either local or as a result of various sexually transmitted
addition,women who began sexual activity at a later age
diseases, such as chlamydia or gonorrhea. Cervicitis
have been shown to have a lower incidence of cervicitis.
can also be caused by birth control devices such as a cer-
Another recommendation is to use a latex condomcon-
vical cap or diaphragm,or chemical exposure. Other risk
sistently during intercourse. If the cervicitis is caused by
factors include multiple sexual partners or cervical trau-
any sexually transmitted disease,the patient is advised to
ma following birth. In postmenopausal women,cervicitis
notify all sexual partners.
is sometimes related to a lack of estrogen.
Although a woman may not notice any signs of
Resources
infection,symptoms of cervicitis include the following:
BOOKS
•persistent unusual vaginal discharge
Berkow,Robert. The Merck Manual of Medical Information.
•abnormal bleeding,either between periods or following Whitehouse Station:Merck Research Laboratories,1997.
sexual intercourse Dambro,Mark R. The 5-Minute Clinical Consult.Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins,2001.
•painful sexual intercourse
Larson,David E. Mayo Clinic Family Health Book.New York:
•vaginal pain William Morrow and Company,1996.
Mandell,Gerald L. Mandell,Douglas,and Bennet’s Principles
•frequent need to urinate
and Practice of Infectious Diseases.Philadelphia:
•burning or itchingin the vaginal area Churchill Livingstone,2000.
Tierney,Lawrence,et. al. Current Medical Diagnosis and
Treatment.Los Altos:Lange Medical Publications,2001.
Diagnosis
PERIODICALS
The standard method of diagnosing cervicitis is Malik,S. N.,et. al. “Benign Cellular Changes in Pap Smears.
through a pelvic examination or a Pap smear. During the Causes and Significance.”Acta Cytologica(Jan-Feb
pelvic exam, the physician usually swabs the affected 2001):5-8.
area, and then sends the tissue sample to a laboratory.
ORGANIZATIONS
The laboratory tries to identify the specific organism
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 409
responsible for causing the cervicitis. A biopsy to take a 12th Street,SW P.O. Box 96920,Washington,DC 20090-
sample of tissue from the affected area is sometimes 6920. (202) 863-2518. <http://www.acog.org>.
required in order to rule out cancer. Colposcopy,a pro-
cedure used to look at the cervix under a microscope, Kim Sharp,M.Ln.
may also be used to rule out cancer.
Treatment
Cesarean section
The first course of treatment for cervicitis is usually
antibiotics. If these medicines do not cure the cervicitis, Definition
other treatment options include:
A cesarean section is a surgical procedure in which
•Loop Electrosurgical Excision Procedure (LEEP)
incisions are made through a woman’s abdomen and
•cryotherapy uterus to deliver her baby.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 723
Cesarean
section
Purpose Precautions
Cesarean sections, also called c-sections, are per- There are several ways that obstetricians and other
formed whenever abnormal conditions complicate labor doctors diagnose conditions that may make a c-section
and vaginal delivery,threatening the life or health of the necessary. Ultrasound testing reveals the positions of the
mother or the baby. The procedure is performed in the baby and the placenta and may be used to estimate the
United States on nearly one of every four babies deliv- baby’s size and gestational age. Fetal heart monitors,in
ered—more than 900,000 babies each year. The proce- use since the 1970s,transmit any signals of fetal distress.
dure is often used in cases where the mother has had a Oxygen deprivation may be determined by checking the
previous c-section. Dystocia, or difficult labor, is the amniotic fluid for meconium (feces)—a lack of oxygen
other common cause of c-sections. causes an unborn baby to defecate. Oxygen deprivation
may also be determined by testing the pH of a blood
Difficult labor is commonly caused by one of the
sample taken from the baby’s scalp; a pH of 7.25 or high-
three following conditions:abnormalities in the mother’s
er is normal, between 7.2 and 7.25 is suspicious, and
birth canal; abnormalities in the position of the fetus; or
below 7.2 is a sign of trouble.
abnormalities in the labor,including weak or infrequent
contractions. When a c-section is being considered because labor
is not progressing,the mother should first be encouraged
Another major factor is fetal distress, a condition
to walk around to stimulate labor. Labor may also be
where the fetus is not getting enough oxygen. Fetal brain
stimulated with the drug oxytocin.
damage can result from oxygen deprivation. Fetal dis-
tress is often related to abnormalities in the position of When a c-section is being considered because the
the fetus or abnormalities in the birth canal, causing baby is in a breech position,the doctor may first attempt
reduced blood flow through the placenta. Other condi- to reposition the baby; this is called external cephalic
tions also can make c-section advisable,such as vaginal version. The doctor may also try a vaginal breech deliv-
herpes,hypertension,and diabetes in the mother. ery,depending on the size of the mother’s pelvis,the size
724 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitces
naeraseC
This baby is being delivered by cesarean section.(Photograph by John Smith, Custom Medical Stock Photo.)
KEY TERMS
Breech presentation—The condition in which the incision is preferred for less bleeding and stronger
baby enters the birth canal with its buttocks or feet healing.
first.
Placenta previa—The placenta totally or partially
Cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD)—The condi- covers the cervix, preventing vaginal delivery.
tion in which the baby’s head is too large to fit
Placental abruption—Separation of the placenta
through the mother’s pelvis.
from the uterine wall before the baby is born, cut-
Classical incision—In a cesarean section, an incision ting off blood flow to the baby.
made vertically along the uterus; this kind of incision
Prolapsed cord—The umbilical cord is pushed into
makes a larger opening but also creates more bleed-
the vagina ahead of the baby and becomes com-
ing, a greater chance of infection, and a weaker scar.
pressed, cutting off blood flow to the baby.
Dystocia—Failure to progress in labor, either
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)—Difficulty
because the cervix will not dilate (expand) further
breathing, found in infants with immature lungs.
or (after full dilation) the head does not descend
through the mother’s pelvis. Transverse presentation—The baby is laying side-
ways across the cervix instead of head first.
Low transverse incision—Incision made horizontal-
ly across the lower end of the uterus; this kind of VBAC—Vaginal birth after cesarean.
of the baby,and the type of breech position the baby is tions may be weak or irregular, the cervix may not be
in. However,a c-section is safer than a vaginal delivery dilating,or the mother’s pelvic structure may not allow
when the baby is 8 lb (3.6 kg) or larger,in a breech posi- adequate passage for birth. When the baby’s head is too
tion with the feet crossed,or in a breech position with the large to fit through the pelvis, the condition is called
head hyperextended. cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD).
A woman should receive regular prenatal care and Another 12% of c-sections are performed to deliver
be able to alert her doctor to the first signs of trouble. a baby in a breech presentation: buttocks or feet first.
Once labor begins, she should be encouraged to move Breech presentation is found in about 3% of all births.
around and to urinate. The doctor should be conservative
In 9% of all cases, c-sections are performed in
in diagnosing dystocia (nonprogressive labor) and fetal
response to fetal distress. Fetal distress refers to any situ-
distress,taking a position of “watchful waiting”before
ation that threatens the baby,such as the umbilical cord
deciding to operate.
getting wrapped around the baby’s neck. This may
appear on the fetal heart monitor as an abnormal heart
Description rate or rhythm.
The most common reason that a cesarean section is The remaining 14% of c-sections are indicated by
performed (in 35% of all cases,according to the United other serious factors. One is prolapse of the umbilical
States Public Health Service) is that the woman has had a cord:the cord is pushed into the vagina ahead of the baby
previous c-section. The “once a cesarean,always a cesare- and becomes compressed,cutting off blood flow to the
an”rule originated when the classical uterine incision was baby. Another is placental abruption:the placenta sepa-
made vertically; the resulting scar was weak and had a risk rates from the uterine wall before the baby is born,cut-
of rupturing in subsequent deliveries. Today,the incision is ting off blood flow to the baby. The risk of this is espe-
almost always made horizontally across the lower end of cially high in multiple births (twins,triplets,or more). A
the uterus (this is called a “low transverse incision”), third factor is placenta previa:the placenta covers the
resulting in reduced blood loss and a decreased chance of cervix partially or completely,making vaginal delivery
rupture. This kind of incision allows many women to have impossible. In some cases requiring c-section,the baby is
a vaginal birth after a cesarean (VBAC). in a transverse position, lying horizontally across the
pelvis,perhaps with a shoulder in the birth canal.
The second most common reason that a c-section is
performed (in 30% of all cases) is difficult childbirth The mother’s health may make delivery by c-section
due to nonprogressive labor (dystocia). Uterine contrac- the safer choice,especially in cases of maternal diabetes,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 725
Cesarean
section
hypertension,genital herpes,Rh blood incompatibility, late circulation (thus avoiding the formation of blood
and preeclampsia (high blood pressure related to preg- clots) and bowel movement. She should limit climbing
nancy). stairs to once a day, and avoid lifting anything heavier
than the baby. She should nap as often as the baby sleeps,
and arrange for help with the housework,meals,and care
Preparation
of other children. She may resume driving after two
When a c-section becomes necessary,the mother is weeks,although some doctors recommend waiting for six
prepped for surgery. A catheter is inserted into her blad- weeks,the typical recovery period from major surgery.
der and an intravenous (IV) line is inserted into her arm.
Leads for monitoring the mother’s heart rate, rhythm,
Risks
and blood pressure are attached. In the operating room,
the mother is given anesthesia—usually a regional anes- Because a c-section is a surgical procedure,it carries
thetic (epidural or spinal),making her numb from below more risk to both the mother and the baby. The maternal
her breasts to her toes. In some cases,a general anesthet- deathrate is less than 0.02%,but that is four times the
ic will be administered. Surgical drapes are placed over maternal death rate associated with vaginal delivery.
the body,except the head; these drapes block the direct However,many women have a c-section for serious med-
view of the procedure. ical problems. The mother is at risk for increased bleeding
(because a c-section may result in twice the blood loss of
The abdomen is washed with an anti-bacterial solu-
a vaginal delivery) from the two incisions,the placental
tion and a portion of the pubic hair may be shaved. The
attachment site,and possible damage to a uterine artery.
first incision opens the abdomen. Infrequently,it will be
Complications occur in less than 10% of cases. The moth-
vertical from just below the navel to the top of the pubic
er may develop infection of either incision, the urinary
bone,or more commonly,it will be a horizontal incision
tract,or the tissue lining the uterus (endometritis). Less
across and above the pubic bone (informally called a
commonly, she may receive injury to the surrounding
“bikini cut”).
organs,like the bladder and bowel. When a general anes-
The second incision opens the uterus. In most cases
thesia is used,she may experience complications from the
a transverse incision is made. This is the favored type
anesthesia. Very rarely, she may develop a wound
because it heals well and makes it possible for a woman
hematoma at the site of either incision or other blood clots
to attempt a vaginal delivery in the future. The classical
leading to pelvic thrombophlebitis(inflammation of the
incision is vertical. Because it provides a larger opening
major vein running from the pelvis into the leg) or a pul-
than a low transverse incision,it is used in the most criti-
monary embolus (a blood clot lodging in the lung).
cal situations,such as placenta previa. However,the clas-
sical incision causes more bleeding, a greater risk of
abdominal infection,and a weaker scar,so the low trans- Normal results
verse incision is preferred.
The after-effects of a c-section vary,depending on
Once the uterus is opened,the amniotic sac is rup- the woman’s age, physical fitness, and overall health.
tured and the baby is delivered. The time from the initial Following this procedure, a woman commonly experi-
incision to birth is typically five minutes. ences gas pains,incision pain,and uterine contractions—
which are also common in vaginal delivery. Her hospital
Once the umbilical cord is clamped and cut,the new-
stay may be two to four days. Breastfeeding the baby is
born is evaluated. The placenta is removed from the
encouraged,taking care that it is in a position that keeps
mother,and her uterus and abdomen are stitched closed
the baby from resting on the mother’s incision. As the
(surgical staples may be used instead in closing the outer-
woman heals, she may gradually increase appropriate
most layer of the abdominal incision). From birth through
exercises to regain abdominal tone. Full recovery may be
suturing may take 30–40 minutes. Thus the entire surgical
seen in four to six weeks.
procedure may be performed in less than one hour.
The prognosis for a successful vaginal birth after a
cesarean (VBAC) may be at least 75%,especially when the
Aftercare
c-section involved a low transverse incision in the uterus
A woman who undergoes a c-section requires both and there were no complications during or after delivery.
the care given to any new mother and the care given to
any patient recovering from major surgery. She should be
Abnormal results
offered pain medication that does not interfere with
breastfeeding. She should be encouraged to get out of bed Of the hundreds of thousands of women in the Unit-
and walk around eight to 24 hours after surgery to stimu- ed States who undergo a c-section each year,about 500
726 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitces
naeraseC
die from serious infections,hemorrhaging,or other com- CFS see Chronic fatigue syndrome
plications. These deaths may be related to the health con-
CGD see Chronic granulomatous disease
ditions that made the operation necessary,and not simply
to the operation itself.
Undergoing a c-section may also inflict psychologi-
cal distress on the mother, beyond hormonal mood
swings and postpartum depression(“baby blues”). The Chagas’ disease
woman may feel disappointment and a sense of failure
for not experiencing a vaginal delivery. She may feel iso- Definition
lated if the father or birthing coach is not with her in the
Chagas’disease is named after Dr. Carlos Chagas
operating room,or if she is treated by an unfamiliar doc-
who first found the organism in the early 1900s. It
tor rather than by her own doctor or midwife. She may
involves damage to the nerves that control the heart,
feel helpless from a loss of control over labor and deliv-
digestive and other organs,and eventually leads to dam-
ery with no opportunity to actively participate. To over-
age to these organs. Worldwide,Chagas’disease affects
come these feelings, the woman must understand why
over 15 million persons, and kills 50,000 each year.
the c-section was necessary. She must accept that she
Researchers believe that the parasite that causes the dis-
couldn’t control the unforeseen events that made the c-
ease is only found in the Americas.
section the optimum means of delivery, and recognize
that preserving the health and safety of both her and her
Description
child was more important than her delivering vaginally.
Women who undergo a c-section should be encouraged When a person is infected with Chagas’disease,the
to share their feelings with others. Hospitals can often parasite known as Trypanosoma cruzifirst causes a mild,
recommend support groups for such mothers. Women short-lived period of “acute” illness; then after a long
should also be encouraged to seek professional help if period without symptoms, the effects of the infection
negative emotions persist. begin to appear. The heart, esophagus, and colon are
most frequently involved. These organs become unable
to contract properly,and begin to stretch or dilate.
Resources
Causes and symptoms
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Family Physicians. 8880 Ward Parkway, T. cruziis carried by insects or bugs known as redu-
Kansas City,MO 64114. (816) 333-9700. <http://www. viid or “kissing bugs.”These insects are very common in
aafp.org>.
Central and South America where they inhabit poorly
Childbirth.Org. <http://www.childbirth.org>.
constructed houses and huts. The insects deposit their
International Cesarean Awareness Network. 1304 Kingsdale
waste material,exposing inhabitants to the parasites. The
Ave.,Redondo Beach,CA 90278. (310) 542-6400.
parasites then enter the body by way of a cut or via the
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275 Mamaroneck
eyes or mouth. T. cruzican also be transmitted by blood
Ave.,White Plains,NY 10605. (914) 428-7100. <http://
www.modimes.org>. transfusion. Eating uncooked, contaminated food or
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. breastfeeding can also transmit the disease. The reduvi-
Bldg 31,Room 2A32,MSC 2425,31 Center Drive, ids,in turn,become infected with the parasite by biting
Bethesda,MD 20892-2425. (800) 505-2742. <http:// infected animals and humans.
www.nichd.nih.gov/sids/sids.htm>.
There are three phases related to infection:
United States Department of Health and Human Services. 200
Independence Avenue SW,Washington DC 20201. (202) •Acute phase lasts about two months,with non-specific
619-0257. <http://www.hhs.gov>. symptoms of low grade fever,headache,fatigue,and
enlarged liver or spleen.
OTHER
•Indeterminate phase lasts 10–20 years, during which
“Cesarean Childbirth.”Perspectives:A Mental Health Maga-
time no symptoms occur, but the parasites are repro-
zine.<http://mentalhelp.net/perspectives>.
ducing in various organs.
“The Cesarean Section FAQ.”Childbirth.org.18 July 1998
<http://www.childbirth.org/section/CSFAQ.html>. •Chronic phase is the stage when symptoms related to
damage of major organs (heart,esophagus,colon) begin.
Bethany Thivierge
In the chronic phase,irregularities of heart rhythm,
heart failure,and blood clots cause weakness,fainting,
Cestodiasis see Tapeworm diseases and even sudden death.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 727
Chagas’
disease
Prognosis
KEY TERMS
Those patients with gastrointestinal complications
often respond to some form of treatment. Cardiac prob-
Achalasia—An esophageal disease of unknown
lems are more difficult to treat,particularly since trans-
cause, in which the lower sphincter or muscle is
plant would rekindle infection.
unable to relax normally, and leads to the accu-
mulation of material within the esophagus.
Prevention
Endoscopy—Exam using an endoscope (a thin
flexible tube which uses a lens or miniature cam- Visitors traveling to areas of known infection should
era to view various areas of the gastrointestinal avoid staying in mud,adobe,or similar huts. Mosquito
tract). When the procedure is performed to exam- nets and insect repellents are useful in helping to avoid
ine certain organs such as the bile ducts or pan- contact with the bugs. Blood screening is not always
creas, the organs are not viewed directly, but effective in many regions where infection is common. It
rather indirectly through the injection of x ray. is necessary to carefully screen people who have emi-
Parasite—An organism that lives on or in another grated from Central and South America before they make
and takes nourishment (food and fluids) from that blood donations.
organism.
Regurgitation—Flow of material back up the Resources
esophagus and into the throat or lungs.
BOOKS
Kirchoff,Louis V. “Trypanosomiasis.”In Harrison’s Principles
of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New
York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Esophageal symptoms are related to difficulty with Owen,Robert L. “American Trypanosomiasis (Chagas’Dis-
swallowing and chest pain. Because the esophagus does ease).”In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and
not empty properly,food regurgitates into the lungs caus- Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W.
ing cough,bronchitis,and repeated bouts of pneumo- B. Saunders Co.,1997.
nia. Inability to eat, weight loss, and malnutrition
PERIODICALS
become a significant factor in affecting survival.
Kirchoff,Louis V. “American Trypanosomiasis (Chagas’Dis-
Involvement of the large intestine (colon) causes ease).”Gastroenterology Clinics of North America(Sept.
constipation,distention,and abdominal pain. 1996):517-533.
Kirchoff,Louis V. “Current Concepts:American Trypanosomi-
asis (Chagas’Disease)-A Tropical Disease Now in the
Diagnosis
United States.”New England Journal of Medicine329,
The best way to diagnose acute infection is to identi- no. 9 (1993):639.
fy the parasites in tissue or blood. Occasionally it is pos-
sible to culture the organism from infected tissue,but this OTHER
Centers for Disease Control.<http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/
process usually requires too much time to be of value. In
ddt/ddthome.htm>.
the chronic phase, antibody levels can be measured.
Efforts to develop new,more accurate tests are ongoing.
David Kaminstein,MD
Treatment
Chalazion see Eyelid disorders
In most cases treatment of symptoms is all that is
possible. Present medications can reduce the duration
and severity of an acute infection, but are only 50%
effective,at best,in eliminating the organisms.
Cardiac effects are managed with pacemakersand
Chancroid
medications. Esophageal complications require either
endoscopic or surgical methods to improve esophageal
Definition
emptying, similar to those used to treat the disorder
known as achalasia. Constipation is treated by increas- Chancroid is a sexually transmitted disease caused
ing fiber and bulk laxatives,or removal of diseased por- by a bacterial infection that is characterized by painful
tions of the colon. sores on the genitals.
728 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
diorcnahC
Description
Chancroid is an infection of the genitals that is
caused by the bacterium Haemophilus ducreyi. Chan-
croid is a sexually transmitted disease,which means that
it is spread from person to person almost always by sexu-
al contact. However, there have been a few cases in
which healthcare providers have become infected
through contact with infected patients.
Common locations for chancroid sores (ulcers) in
men are the shaft or head of the penis, foreskin, the
groove behind the head of the penis,the opening of the
penis,and the scrotum. In women,common locations are
the labia majora (outer lips), labia minora (inner lips),
perianal area (area around the anal opening),and inner
thighs. It is rare for the ulcer(s) to be on the vaginal walls
or cervix. In about 50% of the patients with chancroid,
the infection spreads to either or both of the lymph nodes Chancroid occurs when Haemophilus ducreyipene-
in the groin. trates the skin through an injury, like a scratch or cut.
Once past the skin surface, the warmth, moisture, and
Chancroid is most commonly found in developing
nutrients allow bacteria to grow rapidly. The first sign of
and third world countries. In the United States,the most
chancroid is a small,red papule that occurs within three
common cause of genital ulcers is genital herpes,fol-
to seven days following exposure to the bacteria,but may
lowed by syphilis,and then chancroid. As of 1997,there
take up to one month. Usually within one day,the papule
were fewer than 1,500 cases of chancroid in the United
becomes an ulcer. The chancroid ulcer is painful,bleeds
States per year and it occurred primarily in African
easily, drains a grey or yellowish pus, and has sharply
Americans,Hispanic Americans,and Native Americans.
defined, ragged edges. They can vary in size from an
There are occasional localized outbreaks of chancroid in
eighth of an inch to two inches in diameter. Men usually
the United States. In addition,the practice of exchanging
have only one ulcer,but women often have four or more.
sex for drugs has lead to a link between crack cocaine
Sometimes “kissing” ulcers occur when one ulcer
use and chancroid.
spreads the bacterial infection to an opposite skin sur-
Even though the incidence of chancroid in the United face. For example,kissing ulcers can form on the lips of
States decreased in the 1990s,there is an alarming con- the labia majora. Alternatively,women may not have any
nection between chancroid and human immunodeficien- external sores but may experience painful urination,
cy virus (HIV) infection. HIV causes AIDS (acquired intercourse, and/or bowel movements and may have a
immunodeficiency syndrome) and is easily spread from vaginal discharge or rectal bleeding.
person to person through chancroid ulcers. Uncircum-
Signs that the infection has spread to the lymph node
cised men with chancroid ulcers have a 48% risk of
appear about one week after the formation of the genital
acquiring HIV from sexual contact. Women with chan-
ulcer. Lymph nodes are small organs in the lymphatic
croid ulcers are also at a greater risk of being infected
system that filter waste materials from nearly every
with HIV during sexual contact. Genital ulcers seem to
organ in the body. This lymph node infection is called
act as doorways for HIV to enter and exit.
“lymphadenitis”and the swollen,painful lymph node is
called a “bubo.”The bubo,which appears as a red,spher-
Causes and symptoms ical lump,may burst through the skin,releasing a thick
pus and forming another ulcer.
Haemophilus ducreyiis spread from person to per-
son by vaginal,anal,and oral sexual contact. Uncircum-
Diagnosis
cised men are about three times more likely than circum-
cised men to become infected following exposure to Chancroid may be diagnosed and treated by urolo-
Haemophilus ducreyi. Having unprotected sex,exchang- gists (urinary tract doctors for men),gynecologists (for
ing sex for drugs, and having unprotected sex with a women), and infectious disease specialists. Part of the
prostitute are other risk factors. Many cases of chancroid diagnosis of chancroid involves ruling out genital herpes
in the United States occur in persons who had traveled to and syphilis because genital ulcers are also symptoms of
countries where the disease is more common. these diseases. The appearance of these three diseases
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 729
Chancroid
A close-up view of a chancroid specimen.(Custom Medical
Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Prevention
KEY TERMS
The best prevention for chancroid is to use a con-
dom during sexual intercourse. Chancroid can also be
Bubo—A tender, swollen lymph node in the groin
prevented by abstinence (avoidance of any sexual con-
that may follow a chancroid ulcer.
tact) and by being in a monogamous relationship with a
Groin—The region of the body that lies between disease-free partner. To prevent the spread of chancroid,
the abdomen and the thighs. it is important that all sexual contacts of the patient are
identified and treated.
Resources
can be close enough to be confusing. However,the pres-
BOOKS
ence of a pus-filled lump in the groin of a patient with a
“Chancroid.”In The Skin and Infection:A Color Atlas and
genital ulcer is highly specific for chancroid.
Text,ed. Charles V. Sanders and Lee T. Nesbitt Jr. Balti-
For a clear-cut diagnosis of chancroid,Haemophilus more:Williams and Wilkins,1995.
ducreyimust be isolated from the ulcer. To do this,a ster- Ronald,Allan Ross,and Michelle J. Alfa. “Chancroid,Lym-
phogranuloma Venerum,and Granuloma Inguinale.”In
ile cotton swab is wiped over the ulcer to obtain a pus
Infectious Diseases.2nd ed. Ed. Sherwood L. Gorbach,et
sample. In the laboratory,the sample is put into special
al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1998.
media and placed in an incubator. Haemophilus ducreyi
takes from two to five days to grow in the laboratory. In PERIODICALS
addition,the pus may be examined under the microscope DiCarlo,Richard P.,and David H. Martin. “The Clinical Diag-
to see which bacteria are in the ulcer. A sample of the pus nosis of Genital Ulcer Disease in Men.”Clinical Infec-
tious Diseases25 (Aug. 1997):292-8.
may also be tested to see if the herpes virus is present. A
blood sample will probably be taken from the patient’s ORGANIZATIONS
arm to test for the presence of antibodies to the bacteria Planned Parenthood Federation of America,Inc. 810 Seventh
that causes syphilis. Ave.,New York,NY,10019. (800) 669-0156. <http://
www.plannedparenthood.org>.
Treatment OTHER
Mayo Clinic Online.5 Mar. 1998 <http://www.mayohealth.org>.
The only treatment for chancroid is antibioticsgiven
either once or for several days. Antibiotics taken by mouth
Belinda Rowland,PhD
for one to two weeks include erythromycin (E-Mycin,
Ery-Tab),amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid (Augmentin), Change of life see Menopause
co-trimoxazole (Bactrim, Septra), or ciprofloxacin
Character disorders see Personality
(Cipro). Antibiotics given in one dose include ceftriaxone
(Rocephin),spectinomycin (Trobicin),co-trimoxazole,or disorders
ofloxacin (Floxin).
The ulcer(s) may be cleaned and soaked to reduce
the swelling. Salt solution dressings may be applied to
the ulcer(s) to reduce the spread of the bacteria and pre-
Charcoal, activated
vent additional ulcers. A serious infection of the foreskin
may require circumcision. Pus would be removed from Definition
infected lymph nodes by using a needle and syringe.
Activated charcoal is a fine, black, odorless, and
Very large buboes may require surgical drainage.
tasteless powder. It is made from wood or other materials
that have been exposed to very high temperatures in an
Prognosis airless environment. It is then treated, or activated, to
increase its ability to adsorb by reheating with oxidizing
Without treatment, chancroid may either go away
gas or other chemicals to break it into a very fine powder.
quickly or patients may experience the painful ulcers for
Activated charcoal is pure carbon specially processed to
many months. A complete cure is obtained with antibiotic
make it highly adsorbent of particles and gases in the
treatment. Severe ulcers may cause permanent scars.
body’s digestive system.
Severe scarring of the foreskin may require circumcision.
Urethral fistulas (abnormal passageways from the urine Activated charcoal has often been used since ancient
tube to the skin) may occur and requires corrective surgery. times to cure a variety of ailments including poisoning.
730 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
detavitca
,laocrahC
Its healing effects have been well documented since as
early as 1550 B.C.by the Egyptians. However,charcoal KEY TERMS
was almost forgotten until 15 years ago when it was
rediscovered as a wonderful oral agent to treat most over- Antidote—A remedy to counteract a poison or
doses and toxins. injury.
Adsorption—The binding of a chemical (e.g., drug
Description or poison) to a solid material such as activated
charcoal or clay.
Activated charcoal’s most important use is for treat-
ment of poisoning. It helps prevent the absorption of
most poisons or drugs by the stomach and intestines. In
addition to being used for most swallowed poisons in
coal after eating a meal with high gas-producing foods did
humans,charcoal has been effectively used in dogs,rab-
not produce more gas than those who did not have these
bits,rats,and other animals,as well. It can also adsorb
foods. Charcoal has also been used to treat other intestinal
gas in the bowels and has been used for the treatment of
disorders such as diarrhea, constipation, and cramps.
gas or diarrhea. Charcoal’s other uses such as treatment
There are few studies to support these uses and there are
of viruses, bacteria, bacterial toxic byproducts, snake
also concerns that frequent use of charcoal may decrease
venoms and other substances by adsorption have not
absorption of essential nutrients,especially in children.
been supported by clinical studies. By adding water to
the powder to make a paste, activated charcoal can be
used as an external application to alleviate painand itch- Other uses
ingfrom bites and stings.
Besides being a general antidote for poisons or reme-
dy for gas,activated charcoal has been used to treat other
Poisons and drug overdoses
conditions as well. Based on its ability to adsorb or bind
It is estimated that one million children accidentally to other substances,charcoal has been effectively used to
overdose on drugs mistaken as candies or eat,drink,or clean skin woundsand to adsorb waste materials from the
inhale poisonous household products each year. Infants gastrointestinal tract. In addition, it has been used to
and toddlers are at the greatest risk for accidental poison- adsorb snake venoms, viruses, bacteria, and harmful
ing. Activated charcoal is one of the agents most com- materials excreted by bacteria or fungi. However,because
monly used for these cases. It can absorb large amounts of of lack of scientific studies, these uses are not recom-
poisons quickly. In addition,it is non-toxic,may be stored mended. Activated charcoal, when used together with
for a long time,and can be conveniently administered at other remedies such as aloe vera,acidophilus,and psylli-
home. Charcoal works by binding to irritating or toxic um,helps to keep symptoms of ulcerative colitisunder
substances in the stomach and intestines. This prevents control. While charcoal shows some anti-aging activity in
the toxic drug or chemical from spreading throughout the rats,it is doubtful if it can do the same for humans.
body. The activated charcoal with the toxic substance
bound to it is then excreted in the stool without harm to
Recommended dosage
the body. When poisoning is suspected the local poison
control center should be contacted for instructions. They For poisoning
may recommend using activated charcoal,which should
Activated charcoal is available without prescription.
be available at home so that it can be given to the poi-
However,in case of accidental poisoning or drug overdose
soned child or pet immediately. For severe poisoning,
an emergency poison control center,hospital emergency
several doses of activated charcoal may be needed.
room,or doctor’s office should be called for advice. In case
that both syrup of ipecacand charcoal are recommended
Intestinal disorders
for treatment of the poison,ipecac should be given first.
In the past,activated charcoal was a popular remedy Charcoal should not be given for at least 30 minutes after
for gas. Even before the discovery of America by Euro- ipecac or until vomiting from ipecac stops. Activated char-
peans,Native Americans used powdered charcoal mixed coal is often mixed with a liquid before being swallowed or
with water to treat an upset stomach. Now charcoal is put into the tube leading to the stomach. Activated charcoal
being rediscovered as an alternative treatment for this con- is available as 1.1 oz (33 ml) liquid bottles. It is also avail-
dition. Activated charcoal works like a sponge. Its huge able in 0.5 oz (15 ml) container sizes and as slurry of char-
surface area is ideal for soaking up different substances, coal pre-mixed in water or as a container in which water or
including gas. In one study,people taking activated char- soda pop is added. Keeping activated charcoal at home is a
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 731
Charcoal,
activated
good idea so that it can be taken immediately when needed Charcoal should not be given for more than three or
for treatment of poisoning. four days for treatment of diarrhea. Continuing for
longer periods may interfere with normal nutrition.
For acute poisoning,the dosage is as follows:
Charcoal should not be used in children under three
•Infants (under 1 year of age):1 g/kg.
years of age to treat diarrhea or gas.
•Children (1–12 years of age):15–30 g or 1–2 g/kg with
Activated charcoal should be kept out of reach of
at least 8 oz of water.
children.
•Adults:30–100 g or 1–2 g/kg with at least 8 oz of water.
Side effects
For diarrhea or gas Charcoal may cause constipation when taken for
overdose or accidental poisoning. A laxative should be
A person can take charcoal tablets or capsules with
taken after the crisis is over.
water or sprinkle the content onto foods. The dosage for
treatment of gas or diarrhea in adults is 520–975 mg after Activated charcoal may cause the stool to turn black.
each meal and up to 5 g per day. This is to be expected.
Pain or swelling of the stomach may occur. A doctor
should be consulted.
Precautions
Parents should keep activated charcoal on hand in Interactions
case of emergencies.
Activated charcoal should not be mixed together
Do not give charcoal together with syrup of ipecac. with chocolate syrup,ice cream or sherbet. These foods
The charcoal will adsorb the ipecac. Charcoal should be prevent charcoal from working properly.
taken 30 minutes after ipecac or after the vomiting from
ipecac stops.
Resources
Some activated charcoal products contain sorbitol.
BOOKS
Sorbitol is a sweetener as well as a laxative,therefore,it
Blumenthal,Mark. “Linden Charcoal.”The Complete German
may cause severe diarrhea and vomiting. These products Commission E Monographs,Therapeutic Guide to Herbal
should not be used in infants. Medicines. American Botanical Council,Boston:Integra-
tive Medicine Communications,1998. <http://home.
Charcoal may interfere with the absorption of med-
mdconsult.com>.
ications and nutrients such as vitaminsor minerals. For
Cooney,David. Activated Charcoal:Antidote,Remedy,and
uses other than for treatment of poisoning, charcoal
Health Aid. Brushton,NY:TEACH Services,Inc.,1999.
should be taken two hours after other medications.
Lacy Charles F.,Lora L. Amstrong,Naomi B. Ingrim,and
Charcoal should not be used to treat poisoning Leonard L. Lance. “Charcoal.”The Drug Information
caused by corrosive products such as lye or other strong Handbook Pocket Version:1998-1999. Hudson,OH:Lexi-
Comp Inc.,1998.
acids or petroleum products such as gasoline,kerosene,
Roberts. “Activated Charcoal.”Clinical Procedures in Emer-
or cleaning fluids. Charcoal may make the condition
gency Medicine. Philadelphia,PA:W. B. Saunders Com-
worse and delay diagnosis and treatment. In addition,
pany,1998:726-8. <http://home.mdconsult.com>.
charcoal is also not effective if the poison is lithium,
Wilson,Billie A.,Margaret T. Shannon,and Carolyn L. Stang.
cyanide,iron,ethanol,or methanol.
“Charcoal,Activated (Liquid Antidote).”Nurses Drug
Parents should not mix charcoal with chocolate Guide 2000. Stamford,CT:Appleton & Lange,2000.
syrup, sherbet, or ice cream, even though it may make
charcoal taste better. These foods may prevent charcoal Mai Tran
from working properly.
Activated charcoal may cause swelling or pain in the
stomach. A doctor should be notified immediately. It has
been known to cause problems in people with intestinal Charcot Marie Tooth disease
bleeding,blockage or those people who have had recent
surgery. These patients should talk to their doctor before Definition
using this product.
Charcot Marie Tooth disease(CMT) is the name
Charcoal may be less effective in people with slow of a group of inherited disorders of the nerves in the
digestion. peripheral nervous system (nerves throughout the body
732 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
htooT
eiraM
tocrahC
that communicate motor and sensory information to and which is about the same incidence as multiple sclerosis. It
from the spinal cord) causing weakness and loss of sen- is the most common type of inherited neurologic condition.
sation in the limbs.
Signs and symptoms
Description
CMT is caused by changes (mutations) in any one of
CMT is named for the three neurologists who first a number of genes that carry the instructions to make the
described the condition in the late 1800s. It is also known peripheral nerves. Genes contain the instructions for how
as hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy,and is some- the body grows and develops before and after a person is
times called peroneal muscular atrophy, referring to the born. There are probably at least 15 different genes that
muscles in the leg that are often affected. The age of onset can cause CMT. However,as of early 2001,many have
of CMT can vary anywhere from young childhood to the not yet been identified.
50s or 60s. Symptoms typically begin by the age of 20. For
CMT types 1 and 2 can be broken down into sub-
reasons yet unknown,the severity in symptoms can also
types based upon the gene that is causing CMT. The sub-
vary greatly,even among members of the same family.
types are labeled by letters,so there is CMT1A,CMT1B,
Although CMT has been described for many years, etc. Therefore, the gene with a mutation that causes
it is only since the early 1990s that the genetic cause of CMT1A is different from that that causes CMT1B.
many of the types of CMT have become known. There-
fore,knowledge about CMT has increased dramatically
Types of CMT
within a short time.
CMT1A. The most common type of CMT is called
The peripheral nerves CMT1A. It is caused by a mutation in a gene called
peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22) located on chro-
CMT affects the peripheral nerves,those groups of
mosome 17. The job of this gene is to make a protein
nerve cells carrying information to and from the spinal
(PMP22) that makes up part of the myelin. In most people
cord. CMT decreases the ability of these nerves to carry
who have CMT,the mutation that causes the condition is
motor commands to muscles, especially those furthest
a duplication (doubling) of the PMP22 gene. Instead of
from the spinal cord located in the feet and hands. As a
having two copies of the PMP22 gene (one on each chro-
result,the muscles connected to these nerves eventually
mosome) there are three copies. It is not known how this
weaken. CMT also affects the sensory nerves that carry
extra copy of the PMP22 gene causes the observed symp-
information from the limbs to the brain. Therefore peo-
toms. A small percentage of people with CMT1A do not
ple with CMT also have sensory loss. This causes symp-
have a duplication of the PMP22 gene,but rather have a
toms such as not being able to tell if something is hot or
point mutation in the gene. A point mutation is like a typo
cold or difficulties with balance.
in the gene that causes it to work incorrectly.
There are two parts of the nerve that can be affected
in CMT. A nerve can be likened to an electrical wire,in HEREDITARY NEUROPATHY WITH LIABILITY TO PRES-
which the wire part is the axon of the nerve and the insu- SURE PALSIES (HNPP). HNPP is a condition that is also
caused by a mutation in the PMP22 gene. The mutation
lation surrounding it is the myelin sheath. The job of the
is a deletion. Therefore, there is only one copy of the
myelin is to help messages travel very fast through the
PMP22 gene instead of two. People who have HNPP
nerves. CMT is usually classified depending on which
may have some of the signs of CMT. However,they also
part of the nerve is affected. People who have problems
have episodes where they develop weakness and prob-
with the myelin have CMT type 1 and people who have
lems with sensation after compression of certain pressure
abnormalities of the axon have CMT type 2.
points such as the elbows or knee. Often these symptoms
Specialized testing of the nerves,called nerve con-
will resolve after a few days or weeks, but sometimes
duction testing (NCV),can be performed to determine if
they are permanent.
a person has CMT1 or CMT2. These tests measure the
speed at which messages travel through the nerves. In CMT1B. Another type of CMT, called CMT1B, is
CMT1,the messages move too slowly,but in CMT2 the caused by a mutation in a gene called myelin protein zero
messages travel at the normal speed. (MPZ) located on chromosome 1. The job of this gene is
to make the layers of myelin stick together as they are
wrapped around the axon. The mutations in this gene are
Demographics
point mutations because they involve a change (either
CMT has been diagnosed in people from all over the deletion,substitution,or insertion) at one specific com-
world. It occurs in approximately one in 2,500 people, ponent of a gene.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 733
Charcot
Marie
Tooth
disease
CMTX. Another type of CMT,called CMTX,is usu- gene,he will have CMT. However,females have two X
ally considered a subtype of CMT1 because it affects the chromosomes and therefore have two copies of the Cx32
myelin,but it has a different type of inheritance than type gene. If they have a mutation in one copy of their Cx32
1 or type 2. In CMTX,the CMT-causing gene is located genes,they will only have mild to moderate symptoms of
on the X chromosome and is called connexin 32 (Cx32). CMT that may go unnoticed. This is because their normal
The job of this gene is to code for a class of protein called copy of the Cx32 gene does make normal myelin.
connexins that form tunnels between the layers of myelin.
Females pass on one or the other of their X chromo-
CMT2. There are at least five different genes that can somes to their children—sons or daughters. If a woman
cause CMT type 2. Therefore,CMT2 has subtypes A,B, with a Cx32 mutation passes her normal X chromosome,
C,D and E. As of early 2001,scientists have narrowed in she will have an unaffected son or daughter who will not
on the location of most of the CMT2 causing genes. pass CMT on to his or her children. If the woman passes
However,the specific genes and the mutations have not the chromosome with Cx32 mutation on she will have an
yet been found for most types. Very recently,the gene for affected son or daughter, although the daughter will be
CMT2E has been found. The gene is called neurofila- mildly affected or have no symptoms. Therefore,a woman
ment-light (NF-L). Because it has just been discovered, with a Cx32 mutation has a 50%,or a one in two,chance
not much is known about how mutations in this gene of passing the mutation to her children: a son will be
cause CMT. affected,and a daughter may only have mild symptoms.
When males pass on an X chromosome,they have a
CMT3. In the past a condition called Dejerine-Sottas
daughter. When they pass on a Y chromosome,they have
disease was referred to as CMT3. This is a severe type of
a son. Since the Cx32 mutation is on the X chromosome,
CMT in which symptoms begin in infancy or early child-
a man with CMTX will always pass the Cx32 mutation
hood. It is now known that this is not a separate type of
on to his daughters. However, when he has a son, he
CMT and in fact people who have onset in infancy or
passes on the Y chromosome,and therefore the son will
early childhood often have mutations in the PMP22 or
not be affected. Therefore,an affected male passes the
MPZ genes.
Cx32 gene mutation on to all of his daughters, but to
CMT4. CMT4 is a rare type of CMT in which the none of his sons.
nerve conduction tests have slow response results. Howev-
CMT4 has autosomal recessive inheritance. Males
er, it is classified differently from CMT1 because it is
and females are equally affected. In order for a person to
passed through families by a different pattern of inheri-
have CMT4,they must have a mutation in both of their
tance. There are five different subtypes and each has only
CMT-causing genes—one inherited from each parent.
been described in a few families. The symptoms in CMT4
The parents of an affected person are called carriers.
are often severe and other symptoms such as deafness may
They have one normal copy of the gene and one copy
be present. There are three different genes that have been
with a mutation. Carriers do not have symptoms of CMT.
associated with CMT4 as of early 2001. They are called
Two carrier parents have a 25%,or one in four,chance of
MTMR2,EGR2,and NDRG1. More research is required
passing CMT on to eachof their children.
to understand how mutations in these genes cause CMT.
The onset of symptoms is highly variable, even
among members of the same family. Symptoms usually
Inheritance
progress very slowly over a person’s lifetime. The main
CMT1A and 1B,HNPP,and all of the subtypes of problems caused by CMT are weakness and loss of sen-
CMT2 have autosomal dominant inheritance. Autosomal sation mainly in the feet and hands. The first symptoms
refers to the first 22 pairs of chromosomes that are the are usually problems with the feet such as high arches
same in males and females. Therefore, males and and problems with walking and running. Tripping while
females are affected equally in these types. In a dominant walking and sprained ankles are common. Muscle loss in
condition,only one gene of a pair needs to have a muta- the feet and calves leads to “foot drop” where the foot
tion in order for a person to have symptoms of the condi- does not lift high enough off the ground when walking.
tion. Therefore,anyone who has these types has a 50%, Complaints of cold legs are common,as are cramps in
or one in two,chance of passing CMT on to each of their the legs,especially after exercise.
children. This chance is the same for each pregnancy
In many people, the fingers and hands eventually
and does not change based on previous children.
become affected. Muscle loss in the hands can make fine
CMTX has X-linked inheritance. Since males only movements such as working buttons and zippers difficult.
have one X chromosome,they only have one copy of the Some patients develop tremor in the upper limbs. Loss of
Cx32 gene. Thus,when a male has a mutation in his Cx32 sensation can cause problems such as numbness and the
734 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
htooT
eiraM
tocrahC
inability to feel if something is hot or cold. Most people contracture. Braces are sometimes used to improve control
with CMT remain able to walk throughout their lives. of the lower extremities that can help tremendously with
balance. After wearing braces,people often find that they
Diagnosis have more energy because they are using less energy to
focus on their walking. Occupational therapy is used to
Diagnosis of CMT begins with a careful neurological
provide devices and techniques that can assist tasks such
exam to determine the extent and distribution of weakness. A
as dressing,feeding,writing,and other routine activities of
thorough family history should be taken at this time to deter-
daily life. Voice-activated software can also help people
mine if other people in the family are affected. Testing may
who have problems with fine motor control.
also be performed to rule out other causes of neuropathy.
It is very important that people with CMT avoid
A nerve conduction velocity test should be per-
injury that causes them to be immobile for long periods
formed to measure how fast impulses travel through the
of time. It is often difficult for people with CMT to return
nerves. This test may show characteristic features of
to their original strength after injury.
CMT,but it is not diagnostic of CMT. Nerve conduction
testing may be combined with electromyography There is a long list of medications that should be
(EMG),an electrical test of the muscles. avoided if possible by people diagnosed with CMT such as
hydralazine (Apresoline),megadoses of vitamin A,B,and
A nerve biopsy (removal of a small piece of the 6
D,Taxol,and large intravenous doses of penicillin. Com-
nerve) may be performed to look for changes characteris-
plete lists are available from the CMT support groups. Peo-
tic of CMT. However, this testing is not diagnostic of
ple considering taking any of these medications should
CMT and is usually not necessary for making a diagnosis.
weigh the risks and benefits with their physician.
Definitive diagnosis of CMT is made only by genet-
ic testing,usually performed by drawing a small amount
Prognosis
of blood. As of early 2001,testing is available to detect
mutations in PMP22,MPZ,Cx32 and EGR2. However, The symptoms of CMT usually progress slowly over
research is progressing rapidly and new testing is often many years,but do not usually shorten life expectancy.
made available every few months. All affected members The majority of people with CMT do not need to use a
of a family have the same type of CMT. Therefore once a wheelchair during their lifetime. Most people with CMT
mutation is found in one affected member,it is possible are able to lead full and productive lives despite their
to test other members who may have symptoms or are at physical challenges.
risk of developing CMT.
Resources
Prenatal diagnosis
BOOKS
Testing during pregnancy to determine whether an Parry,G. J.,ed. Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disorders:A Handbook
unborn child is affected is possible if genetic testing in a for Primary Care Physicians. Available from the CMT
family has identified a specific CMT-causing mutation. Association,1995.
This can be done after 10–12 weeks of pregnancy using a Shy,M. E.,J. Kamholz,and R. E. Lovelace,eds. “Charcot-
procedure called chorionic villus sampling(CVS). CVS Marie-Tooth Disorders.”Annals of the New York Academy
involves removing a tiny piece of the placenta and exam- of Sciences.1999.
ining the cells. Testing can also be done by amniocente-
PERIODICALS
sisafter 16 weeks gestation by removing a small amount Keller. M. P.,and P. F. Chance. “Inherited peripheral neu-
of the amniotic fluid surrounding the baby and analyzing ropathies.”Seminars in Neurology19,no. 4 (1999):353–62.
the cells in the fluid. Each of these procedures has a small Quest. A magazine for patients available from the Muscular
risk of miscarriageassociated with it,and those who are Dystrophy Association.
interested in learning more should check with their doctor
ORGANIZATIONS
or genetic counselor. Couples interested in these options
Charcot Marie Tooth Association (CMTA). 2700 Chestnut
should obtain genetic counselingto carefully explore all
Parkway,Chester,PA 19013. (610) 499-9264 or (800)
of the benefits and limitations of these procedures. 606-CMTA. Fax:(610) 499-9267. <cmtassoc@aol.com>.
<http://www.charcot-marie-tooth.org>.
Treatment CMT International. Attn:Linda Crabtree,1 Springbank Dr. St.
Catherine’s,ONT L2S2K1. Canada (905) 687-3630.
There is no cure for CMT. However, physical and
<http://www.cmtint.org>.
occupational therapy are an important part of CMT treat- Muscular Dystrophy Association. 3300 East Sunrise Dr.,Tuc-
ment. Physical therapy is used to preserve range of motion son,AZ 85718. (520) 529-2000 or (800) 572-1717.
and minimize deformity caused by muscle shortening,or <http://www.mdausa.org>.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 735
Charcot
Marie
Tooth
disease
Although this condition can affect any joint, the
knee is the joint most commonly involved. In individuals
with diabetes mellitus, the foot is most commonly
affected. The disease can involve only one joint or it may
affect two or three joints. More than three affected joints
is very rare. In all cases, the specific joint(s) affected
depends on the location of the nerve damage.
Causes and symptoms
Many diseases and injuries can interfere with the abil-
ity to feel pain. Conditions such as diabetes mellitus,
spinal injuries and diseases,alcoholism,and even syphilis
can all lead to a loss of the ability to feel pain in some
areas. Lack of pain sensation may also be congenital.
The symptoms of Charcot’s joints can go unnoticed
for some time and may be confused with osteoarthritis
in the beginning. Swelling and stiffness in a joint without
the expected pain, or with less pain than would be
expected,are the primary symptoms of this condition. As
Neuropathy Association. 60 E. 42nd St. Suite 942,New York,
the condition progresses,however,the joint can become
NY 10165. (212) 692-0662. <http://www.neuropathy.org>.
very painful due to fluid build-up and bony growths.
OTHER
HNPP—Hereditary Neuropathy with liability to Pressure Diagnosis
Palsies. University of Washington,Seattle. <http://www. Charcot’s joints is suspected when a person with a
hnpp.org>.
disease that impairs pain sensation exhibits painless
“GeneClinics.”<www.gene clinics.org>.
swelling and/or stiffness in a joint. Standard x rays will
OMIM—Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man. <http://www.
show damage to the joint,and may also show abnormal
ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/Omim>.
bone growth and calcium deposits. Floating bone frag-
ments from previous injuries may also be visible.
Karen M. Krajewski,MS,CGC
Treatment
In the early stages of Charcot’s joints,braces to sta-
bilize the joints can help stop or minimize the damage.
Charcot’s joints When the disease has progressed beyond braces,surgery
can sometimes repair the joint. If the damage is exten-
Definition sive,an artificial joint may be necessary.
Charcot’s joints is a progressive degenerative disease
Prognosis
of the joints caused by nerve damage resulting in the loss of
ability to feel painin the joint and instability of the joint. Treatment of the disease causing loss of pain percep-
tion may help to slow the damage to the joints.
Description
Prevention
Charcot’s joints, also called neuropathic joint dis- Preventing or effectively managing the underlying
ease,is the result of two conditions present in the joint. disease can slow or in some cases reverse joint damage,
The first factor is the inability to feel pain in the joint due but the condition cannot be prevented.
to nerve damage. The second factor is that injuries to the
joint go unnoticed leading to instability and making the
Resources
joint more susceptible to further injury. Repeated small
BOOKS
injuries,strains and even fracturescan go unnoticed until
Resnick,Donald. Diagnosis of Bone and Joint Disorders.
finally the joint is permanently destroyed. Loss of the pro-
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1994.
tective sensation of pain is what leads to the disintegration
of the joint and often leads to deformity in the joint. Dorothy Elinor Stonely
736 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stnioj
s’tocrahC
KEY TERMS
Axon—Skinny, wire-like extension of nerve cells.
Myelin—A fatty sheath surrounding nerves in the
peripheral nervous system, which help them con-
duct impulses more quickly.
Nerve conduction testing—Procedure that mea-
sures the speed at which impulses move through
the nerves.
Neuropathy—A condition caused by nerve dam-
age. Major symptoms include weakness, numb-
ness, paralysis, or pain in the affected area.
Peripheral nerves—Nerves throughout the body
that carry information to and from the spinal cord.
Charley horse seeMuscle spasms and cramps there is no health reason why it shouldn’t be used,then the
treatment can begin. The patient is generally taken to a
comfortable treatment area,sometimes in a group loca-
tion, and an intravenous line is started. A solution of
EDTA together with vitaminsand mineralstailored for
the individual patient is given. Most treatments take three
Chelation therapy
to four hours,as the infusion must be given slowly in order
to be safe. The number of recommended treatments is usu-
Definition
ally between 20 and 40. They are given one to three times
Chelation therapy is an intravenous treatment a week. Maintenance treatments can then be given at the
designed to bind heavy metals in the body in order to rate of once or twice a month. Maximum benefits are
treat heavy metal toxicity. Proponents claim it also treats reportedly attained after approximately three months after
coronary artery diseaseand other illnesses that may be a treatment series. The cost of therapy is considerable,but
linked to damage from free radicals (reactive molecules). it is a fraction of the cost of an expensive medical proce-
dure like cardiac bypass surgery. Intravenous vitamin C
and mercury chelation therapies are also offered.
Purpose
The benefits of EDTA chelation for the treatment of
Preparations
lead poisoningand excessively high calcium levels are
undisputed. The claims of benefits for those suffering A candidate for chelation therapy should initially
from atherosclerosis,coronary artery disease,and other have a thorough history and physical to define the type and
degenerative diseases are more difficult to prove. Report- extent of clinical problems. Laboratory tests will be done
ed uses for chelation therapy include treatment of angi- to determine whether there are any conditions present that
na,gangrene,arthritis,multiple sclerosis,Parkinson’s would prevent the use of chelation. Patients who have pre-
disease,psoriasis,and Alzheimer’s disease. Improve- existing hypocalcemia,poor liver or kidney function,con-
ment is also claimed for people experiencing diminished gestive heart failure,hypoglycemia,tuberculosis,clot-
sight,hearing,smell,coordination,and sexual potency. ting problems, or potentially allergic conditions are at
higher risk for complications from chelation therapy. A
Doppler ultrasound may be performed to determine the
Description
adequacy of blood flow in different regions of the body.
Origins
The term chelation is from the Greek root word Precautions
“chele,” meaning “claw.” Chelating agents, most com- It is important for people who receive chelation ther-
monly diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA),were originally apy to work with medical personnel who are experienced
designed for industrial applications in the early 1900s. It in the use of this treatment. Treatment should not be
was not until the World War II era that the potential for undertaken before a good physical,lifestyle evaluation,
medical therapy was realized. The initial intent was to history, and any laboratory tests necessary are per-
develop antidotes to poison gas and radioactive contami- formed. The staff must be forthcoming about test results
nants. The need for widespread therapy of this nature did and should answer any questions the patient may have.
not materialize,but more practical uses were found for Evaluation and treatment should be individualized and
chelation. During the following decade,EDTA chelation involve assessment of kidney function before each treat-
therapy became standard treatment for people suffering ment with chelation, since the metals bound by the
from lead poisoning. Patients who had received this EDTA are excreted through the kidneys.
treatment claimed to have other health improvements
Although EDTA binds harmful, toxic metals like
that could not be attributed to the lead removal only.
mercury,lead,and cadmium,it also binds some essential
Especially notable were comments from those who had
nutrients of the body,such as copper,iron,calcium,zinc,
previously suffered from intermittent claudication and
and magnesium. Large amounts of zinc are lost during
angina. They reported suffering less pain and fatigue,
chelation. Zinc deficiency can cause impaired immune
with improved endurance,after chelation therapy. These
function and other harmful effects. Supplements of zinc
reports stimulated further interest in the potential bene-
are generally given to patients undergoing chelation,but
fits of chelation therapy for people suffering from athero-
it is not known whether this is adequate to prevent defi-
sclerosis and coronary artery disease.
ciency. Also,chelation therapy does not replace proper
If the preparatory examination suggests that there is a nutrition, exercise, and appropriate medications or
condition that could be improved by chelation therapy,and surgery for specific diseases or conditions.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 737
Chelation
therapy
PERIODICALS
KEY TERMS Chappel,Stall. Journal of the Advancement of Medicine6
(1993):139-160.
Angina—Chest pain caused by reduced oxygen to ORGANIZATIONS
the heart. The American College for Advancement in Medicine (ACAM).
23121 Verdugo Dr.,Suite 204,Laguna Hills,CA 92653.
Atherosclerosis—Arterial disease characterized by
(714) 583-7666.
fatty deposits on inner arterial walls.
American Heart Association. <http://www.americanheart.org/
Hypocalcemia—Low blood calcium. Heart_and_Stroke_A_Z_Guide/chelat.html> (2000).
Hypoglycemia—Low blood sugar.
OTHER
Intermittent claudication—Leg pain and weak- Cranton,Elmer. Chelation therapy.<http://www.drcranton.
ness caused by walking. com/chelation.html> (1999).
Green,Saul. Quackwatch:Chelation therapy.<http://www.
Thrombophlebitis—Inflammation of a vein togeth-
quackwatch.com/01QuackeryRelatedTopics/chelation.
er with clot formation. html> (2000).
Judith Turner
Side effects Chemica see Skin resurfacing
Side effects of chelation therapy are reportedly Chemical debridement see Debridement
unusual,but are occasionally serious. Mild reactions may
Chemobrasion see Skin resurfacing
include,but are not limited to,local irritation at the infu-
sion site, skin reactions, nausea, headache, dizziness,
hypoglycemia,fever,leg cramps,or loose bowel move-
ments. Some of the more serious complications reported
have included hypocalcemia,kidney damage,decreased
clotting ability, anemia, bone marrow damage, insulin Chemonucleolysis
shock,thrombophlebitiswith embolism,and even rare
deaths. However,some doctors feel that the latter groups Definition
of complications occurred before the safer method cur-
Chemonucleolysis is a medical procedure that
rently used for chelation therapy was developed.
involves the dissolving of the gelatinous cushioning
material in an intervertebral disk by the injection of an
Research and general acceptance enzyme such as chymopapain.
EDTA chelation is a highly controversial therapy.
The treatment is approved by the United States Food and Purpose
Drug Administration (FDA) for lead poisoning and seri-
Between each vertebra lies a disk of cushioning
ously high calcium levels. However,for the treatment of
material that keeps the spinal bones from rubbing togeth-
atherosclerotic heart disease,EDTA chelation therapy is
er and absorbs some of the shockto the spine from body
not endorsed by the American Heart Association (AHA),
movements. In the center of the disk is soft,gelatinous
the FDA,the National Institutes of Health (NIH),or the
material called the nucleus pulposus (NP). The NP is sur-
American College of Cardiology. The AHA reports that
rounded by a tough fibrous coating. Sometimes when the
there are no adequate, controlled, published scientific
back is injured,this coating can weaken and bulge or tear
studies using currently approved scientific methods to
to allow the NP to ooze out. When this happens, it is
support this therapy for the treatment of coronary artery
called a herniated nucleus pulposus (HNP),or—in com-
disease. However,a pooled analysis from the results of
mon language—a herniated disk.
over 70 studies showed positive results in all but one.
When the disk bulges or herniates,it can put pres-
Resources sure on nerves which originate in the spinal column,and
go to other parts of the body. This causes lower back
BOOKS
pain,and/or pain to the hips,legs,arms,shoulders,and
Cassileth,Barrie. The Alternative Medicine Handbook.New
York:W. W. Norton & Company,Inc.,1998. neck, depending on the location of the herniated disk.
Cranton,Elmer. Bypassing Bypass.Virginia:Medex Publish- Chemonucleolysis uses chymopapain, an enzyme de-
ers,Inc.,1997. rived from papyrus,to dissolve the disk material that has
738 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisyloelcunomehC
•if the disk is sequestered
KEY TERMS •if the patient has had several failed back operations
•if a spinal cord tumor is present
Chymopapain—An enzyme from the milky white
fluid of the papaya, used for medical purposes in •if the patient has a neurological disease such as multi-
chemonucleolysis. ple sclerosis
Myelography—An x-ray test that evaluates the Other conditions may affect the appropriateness of
subarachnoid space of the spine. chemonucleolysis,including hypertension,obesity,dia-
betes,and a family history of stroke.
Nucleus pulposus (NP)—an elastic, pulpy mass in
the center of each vertebral disk.
Description
A small gauge needle is placed in the center of the
affected disk. Chymopapain is introduced into the disk.
been displaced because of injury. Herniated disks are the
The patient needs to remain still.
cause of only a small proportion of cases of lower back
pain,and chemonucleolysis is appropriate for only some
cases of HNP. Preparation
Chemonucleolysis is a conservative alternative to Patients will need tests such as a myelogram or CT
disk surgery. There are three types of disk injuries. A scan to pinpoint the herniated disk. Some doctors medicate
protruded disk is one that is intact but bulging. In an the patient 24 hours prior to the operation in order to
extruded disk,the fibrous wrapper has torn and the NP decrease the chances of post-operative lower back stiffness.
has oozed out, but is still connected to the disk. In a
sequestered disk,a fragment of the NP has broken loose
Aftercare
from the disk and is free in the spinal canal. Chemonu-
cleolysis is effective on protruded and extruded disks, Patients may feel lower back stiffness,which goes
but not on sequestered disk injuries. In the United away in few weeks. Heavy lifting and sports activities
States, chymopapain chemonucleolysis is approved should be avoided for at least three months.
only for use in the lumbar (lower) spine. In other coun-
tries,it has also been used successfully to treat cervical Risks
(upper spine) hernias.
The greatest risk is that the patient may be allergic to
Other indications that a patient is a good candidate
chymopapain. The death rate for chemonucleolysis is
for chemonucleolysis instead of surgery include:
only 0.02%. Complications overall are five to 10 times
•the patient is 18–50 years of age less than with conventional surgery,and the failure rate is
roughly comparable to the failure rate in conventional
•leg pain is worse than lower back pain
disk surgery.
•other conservative treatments have failed
•the spot where the herniated disk presses on the nerve
Normal results
has been pinpointed by myelography, computed
tomography scan (CT scan), or magnetic resonance Many patients feel immediate relief from pain,but,
imaging(MRI) in about 30% of patients,maximal relief takes six weeks.
The long term (seven to 20 years) success rate averages
•the patient wishes to avoid surgery
about 75%,which is comparable to the success rate for
conventional surgery.
Precautions
There are some situations in which chemonucleoly-
Resources
sis should not be performed. Chymopapain is derived
PERIODICALS
from the papaya. About 0.3% of patients are allergic to
Alexander,Herbert. “Chemonucleolysis for Lumbar Disc Her-
chymopapain and go into life-threatening shock when
niation:How Does it Stack up to Other Minimally Inva-
exposed to the enzyme. Chemonucleolysis should not be
sive Approaches?”Journal of Musculoskelatal Medicine
performed on patients allergic to chymopapain or
12,no. 2 (1995):13-24.
papaya. It also should not be done:
•when the patient is pregnant Tish Davidson
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 739
Chemonucleolysis
Types of chemotherapy drugs
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy drugs are classified based on how
they work. The main types of chemotherapy drugs are
Definition
described below:
Chemotherapy is treatment of cancer with anti-
•Alkylating drugs kill cancer cells by directly attacking
cancer drugs.
DNA, the genetic material of the genes. Cyclophos-
phamide is an alkylating drug.
Purpose •Antimetabolites interfere with the production of DNA
and keep cells from growing and multiplying. An
The main purpose of chemotherapy is to kill cancer
example of an antimetabolite is 5-fluorouracil (5-FU).
cells. It is usually used to treat patients with cancer that
has spread from the place in the body where it started •Antitumor antibiotics are made from natural sub-
(metastasized). Chemotherapy destroys cancer cells any- stances such as fungi in the soil. They interfere with
where in the body. It even kills cells that have broken off important cell functions,including production of DNA
from the main tumor and traveled through the blood or and cell proteins. Doxorubicin and bleomycin belong to
lymph systems to other parts of the body. this group of chemotherapy drugs.
Chemotherapy can cure some types of cancer. In •Plant alkaloids prevent cells from dividing normally.
some cases,it is used to slow the growth of cancer cells Vinblastine and vincristine are plant alkaloids obtained
or to keep the cancer from spreading to other parts of the from the periwinkle plant.
body. When a cancer has been removed by surgery,
•Steroid hormones slow the growth of some cancers that
chemotherapy may be used to keep the cancer from com-
depend on hormones. For example,tamoxifen is used
ing back (adjuvant therapy). Chemotherapy also can ease
to treat breast cancers that depend on the hormone
the symptoms of cancer,helping some patients to have a
estrogen for growth.
better quality of life.
Combination chemotherapy
Precautions
Chemotherapy is usually given in addition to other
There are many different types of chemotherapy
cancer treatments,such as surgery and radiation therapy.
drugs. Oncologists, doctors who specialize in treating
When given with other treatments, it is called adjuvant
cancer, determine which drugs are best suited for
chemotherapy. An oncologist decides which chemothera-
each patient. This decision is based on the type of
py drug or combination of drugs will work best for each
cancer, the patient’s age and health, and other drugs
patient. The use of two or more drugs together often works
the patient is taking. Some patients should not be
better than a single drug for treating cancer. This is called
treated with certain chemotherapy drugs. Age and
combination chemotherapy. Scientific studies of different
other conditions may affect the drugs with which a
drug combinations help doctors learn which combinations
person may be treated. Heart disease, kidney disease,
work best for each type of cancer.
and diabetes are conditions that may limit the choice
of treatment drugs.
How chemotherapy is given
Description Chemotherapy is administered in different ways,
depending on the drugs to be given and the type of can-
More than 50 chemotherapy drugs are currently
cer. Doctors decide the dose of chemotherapy drugs con-
available to treat cancer and many more are being tested
sidering many factors,among them being the patient’s
for their ability to destroy cancer cells. Most chemothera-
height and weight.
py drugs interfere with the ability of cells to grow or mul-
tiply. Although these drugs affect all cells in the body, Chemotherapy may be given by one or more of the
many useful treatments are most effective against rapidly following methods:
growing cells. Cancer cells grow more quickly than most
•orally
other body cells. Other cells that grow fast are cells of the
bone marrow that produce blood cells,cells in the stom- •by injection
ach and intestines,and cells of the hair follicles. There-
•through a catheter or port
fore,the most common side effects of chemotherapy are
linked to their effects on other fast growing cells. •topically
740 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yparehtomehC
Oral chemotherapy is given by mouth in the form a
pill,capsule,or liquid. This is the easiest method and can
usually be done at home.
Intravenous (IV) chemotherapy is injected into a
vein. A small needle is inserted into a vein on the hand or
lower arm. The needle is usually attached to a small tube
called a catheter,which delivers the drug to the needle
from an IV bag or bottle.
Intramuscular (IM) chemotherapy is injected into a
muscle. Chemotherapy given by intramuscular injection
is absorbed into the blood more slowly than IV
chemotherapy. Because of this, the effects of IM
chemotherapy may last longer than chemotherapy given
intravenously. Chemotherapy may also be injected sub-
cutaneously (SQ or SC), which means under the skin.
Injection of chemotherapy directly into the cancer is
called intralesional (IL) injection.
Chemotherapy may also be given by a catheter or
port permanently inserted into a central vein or body cav-
ity. A port is a small reservoir or container that is placed
in a vein or under the skin in the area where the drug will
be given. These methods eliminate the need for repeated
injections and may allow patients to spend less time in
the hospital while receiving chemotherapy. A common
location for a permanent catheter is the external jugular
vein in the neck. Intraperitoneal (IP) chemotherapy is
administered into the abdominal cavity through a
catheter or port. Chemotherapy given by catheter or port
into the spinal fluid is called intrathecal (IT) administra-
tion. Catheters and ports may also be placed in the chest
cavity,bladder,or pelvis,depending on the location of
the cancer to be treated.
Topical chemotherapy is given as a cream or oint- given at a time,or they may be given alternately,one fol-
ment applied directly to the cancer. This method is more lowing the other.
common in treatment of certain types of skin cancer.
Preparation
Treatment location and schedule
A number of medical tests are done before
Patients may take chemotherapy at home,in the doc- chemotherapy is started. The oncologist will determine
tor’s office,or as an inpatient or outpatient at the hospi- how much the cancer has spread from the results of x
tal. Most patients stay in the hospital when first begin- rays and other imaging tests and from samples of the
ning chemotherapy, so their doctor can check for any tumor taken during surgery.
side effects and change the dose if needed.
Blood tests give the doctor important information
How often and how long chemotherapy is given about the function of the blood cells and levels of chemi-
depends on the type of cancer,how patients respond to cals in the blood. A complete blood count (CBC) is
the drugs, patients’ health and ability to tolerate the commonly done before and regularly during treatment.
drugs, and the types of drugs given. Chemotherapy The CBC shows the numbers of white blood cells, red
administration may take only a few minutes or may last blood cells, and platelets in the blood. Because
as long as several hours. Chemotherapy may be given chemotherapy affects the bone marrow, where blood
daily, weekly, or monthly. A rest period may follow a cells are made, levels of these cells often drop during
course of treatment before the next course begins. In chemotherapy. The white blood cells and platelets are
combination chemotherapy,more than one drug may be most likely to be affected by chemotherapy. A drop in the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 741
Chemotherapy
Patient undergoing high dose stem cell chemotherapy.
(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
white blood cell count means that the immune system •loss of appetite
cannot function properly. Low levels of platelets can
•hair loss
cause a patient to bleed easily from a cut or other wound.
A low red blood cell count can lead to anemia (deficien- •anemia and fatigue
cy of red blood cells) and fatigue. •infection
When a chemotherapy treatment takes a long time,the •easy bleeding or bruising
patient may prepare for it by wearing comfortable clothes.
•sores in the mouth and throat
Bringing a book to read or a tape to listen to may help pass
the time and ease the stress of receiving chemotherapy. •neuropathy and other damage to the nervous system
Some patients bring a friend or family member to provide
•kidney damage
company and support during treatment.
Nausea and vomiting are common,but can usually
Sometimes, patients taking chemotherapy drugs
be controlled by taking antinausea drugs, drinking
known to cause nausea are given medications called anti-
enough fluids,and avoiding spicy foods. Loss of appetite
emetics before chemotherapy is administered. Anti-emet-
may be due to nausea or the stress of undergoing cancer
ic drugs help to lessen feelings of nausea. Two anti-nau-
treatment.
sea medications that may be used are Kytril and Zofran.
Some chemotherapy drugs cause hair loss,but it is
Other ways to prepare for chemotherapy and help
almost always temporary.
lessen nausea are:
Low blood cell counts caused by the effect of
•regularly eat nutritious foods and drink lots of fluids
chemotherapy on the bone marrow can lead to anemia,
•eat and drink normally until about two hours before infections,and easy bleeding and bruising. Patients with
chemotherapy anemia have too few red blood cells to deliver oxygen
and nutrients to the body’s tissues. Anemic patients feel
•eat high carbohydrate, low-fat foods and avoid spicy
tired and weak. If red blood cell levels fall too low, a
foods
blood transfusionmay be given.
Patients receiving chemotherapy are more likely to
Aftercare
get infections. This happens because their infection-
Tips for helping to control side effects after chemo- fighting white blood cells are reduced. It is important to
therapy include: take measures to avoid getting infections. When the
white blood cell count drops too low,the doctor may pre-
•follow any instructions given by the doctor or nurse
scribe medications called colony stimulating factors that
•take all prescribed medications
help white blood cells grow. Neupogen and Leukine are
•eat small amounts of bland foods two colony stimulants used as treatments to help fight
infection.
•drink lots of fluids
Platelets are blood cells that make the blood clot.
•get plenty of rest
When patients do not have enough platelets, they may
Some patients find it helps to breathe fresh air or get bleed or bruise easily,even from small injuries. Patients
mild exercise,such as taking a walk. with low blood platelets should take precautions to avoid
injuries. Medicines such as aspirinand other painreliev-
Risks ers can affect platelets and slow down the clotting process.
Chemotherapy can cause irritation and dryness in the
Chemotherapy drugs are toxic to normal cells as
mouth and throat. Painful sores may form that can bleed
well as cancer cells. A dose that will destroy cancer cells
and become infected. Precautions to avoid this side effect
will probably cause damage to some normal cells. Doc-
include getting dental care before chemotherapy begins,
tors adjust doses to do the least amount of harm possible
brushing the teeth and gums regularly with a soft brush,
to normal cells. Some patients feel few or no side effects,
and avoiding mouth washes that contain salt or alcohol.
and others may have more serious side effects. In some
cases,a dose adjustment is all that is needed to reduce or
stop a side effect. Normal results
Some chemotherapy drugs have more side effects
The main goal of chemotherapy is to cure cancer.
than others. Some of the most common side effects are:
Many cancers are cured by chemotherapy. It may be used
•nausea and vomiting in combination with surgery to keep a cancer from spread-
742 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yparehtomehC
McKay,Judith,and Nancee Hirano. The Chemotherapy Sur-
KEY TERMS vival Guide.Oakland,CA:New Harbinger Publications,
1993.
Adjuvant therapy—Treatment given after surgery ORGANIZATIONS
or radiation therapy to prevent the cancer from American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Rd.,NE,Atlanta,GA
coming back. 30329-4251. (800) 227-2345. <http://www.cancer.org>.
National Cancer Institute. Building 31,Room 10A31,31 Cen-
Alkaloid—A type of chemical commonly found in
ter Drive,MSC 2580,Bethesda,MD 20892-2580. (800)
plants and often having medicinal properties.
422-6237. <http://www.nci.nih.gov>.
Alykylating drug—A drug that kills cells by direct-
OTHER
ly damaging DNA.
“Introduction to Chemotherapy.”OncoLink.University of
Antiemetic—A medicine that helps control nau- Pennsylvania Cancer Center. 1998 <http://www.oncolink.
sea; also called an anti-nausea drug. upenn.edu>.
“What is Chemotherapy?”OncoLink.University of Pennsylva-
Antimetabolite—A drug that interferes with a
nia Cancer Center. 1998 <http://www.oncolink.upenn.edu>.
cell’s growth or ability to multiply.
Platelets—Blood cells that function in blood clot- Toni Rizzo
ting.
ing to other parts of the body. Some widespread, fast-
Chest drainage therapy
growing cancers are more difficult to treat. In these cases,
chemotherapy may slow the growth of the cancer cells. Definition
Doctors can tell if the chemotherapy is working by
Chest drainage therapy involves the removal of air,
the results of medical tests. Physical examination,blood
blood,pus,or other secretions from the chest cavity.
tests,and x rays are all used to check the effects of treat-
ment on the cancer.
Purpose
The possible outcomes of chemotherapy are:
Chest drainage therapy is done to relieve pressure on
•Complete remission or response. The cancer complete-
the lungs,and remove fluid that could promote infection.
ly disappears. The course of chemotherapy is complet-
Installing a chest drainage tube can be either an emer-
ed and the patient is tested regularly for a recurrence.
gency or a planned procedure.
•Partial remission or response. The cancer shrinks in
Removing air or fluids from the chest involves the
size but does not disappear. The same chemotherapy
insertion of a tube through the skin and the muscles
may be continued or a different combination of drugs
between the ribs,and into the chest cavity. This cavity is
may be tried.
also called the pleural space. Insertion of this tube is
•Stabilization. The cancer does not grow or shrink. called thoracostomy,and chest drainage therapy is some-
Other therapy options may be explored. A tumor may times called thoracostomy tube drainage.
stay stabilized for many years.
Conditions that may need to be treated by chest
•Progression. The cancer continues to grow. Other thera- drainage therapy include emphysema(air in the tissues
py options may be explored. of the lungs), tuberculosis, and spontaneous pneu-
•A secondary malignancy may develop from the one mothorax (air in the chest cavity) that causes more
being treated,and that second cancer may need addi- than a 25% collapse of the lung. Other conditions
tional chemotherapy or other treatment. include cancer that causes excessive secretions,
empyema(pus in the thoracic cavity),or hemothorax
(blood in the thoracic cavity). Almost all chest drainage
Resources
therapy is done to drain blood from the chest cavity
BOOKS after lung or heart surgery. In cases where the lung is
Dollinger,Malin,et al. Everyone’s Guide to Cancer Therapy: collapsed, removing fluids by chest drainage therapy
How Cancer is Diagnosed,Treated,and Managed Day to
allows the lung to reinflate.
Day.3rd ed. Kansas City:Andres & McMeel,1998.
Drum,David. Making the Chemotherapy Decision.Los Ange- Oftentimes an x ray is performed prior to treatment
les:Lowell House,1996. to determine whether the problem is either fluid or air in
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 743
Chest
drainage
therapy
necessary to insert more than one tube to drain localized
KEY TERMS pockets of fluid that have accumulated.
Empyema—Pus in the pleural cavity. Preparation
Hemothorax—Blood in the pleural cavity. A chest x ray is usually done before the chest
drainage tube is inserted. Sometimes fluid becomes
Pleural cavity—The area of the chest that includes
trapped in isolated spaces in the lung,and it is necessary
the lining of the chest cavity, the space the lungs
to do an ultrasound to determine where to locate the
are located in, and the membrane covering of the
drainage tube. Computed tomography scans(CT) are
lungs.
useful in locating small pockets of fluids caused by can-
Spontaneous pneumothorax—Air in the chest
cer or tuberculosis.
cavity that occurs because of disease or other nat-
urally occurring cause. Air and blood together in
Aftercare
this space is called a pneumohemothorax.
Normally after the material has been removed
from the chest cavity and the situation is resolved,the
chest drainage tube is removed. In cases where the rea-
the pleural space. Sometimes a procedure called thora- son for the tube was air in the pleural cavity,the tube is
centesis is performed in an effort to avoid inserting a clamped and left in place several hours before it is
chest drainage tube. In this procedure a needle with a removed to make sure no more air is leaking into the
catheter is inserted into the pleural space and fluid is space. If the patient is on mechanical ventilation, the
removed. When fluid continues to accumulate, chest tube is often left in place until a respirator is no longer
drainage therapy is usually the next step. This is especial- necessary. Chest drainage therapy is usually done in
ly true when there is a lung infection underlying the fluid conjunction with treating the underlying cause of the
build-up. fluid build-up.
The fluid that has been drained is examined for bac-
terial growth,cancer cells,pus,and blood—to determine
Precautions
the underlying cause of the condition and appropriate
Chest drainage therapy is not done if a collapsed treatment.
lung is not life-threatening. It also should be avoided for
patients who have blood clotting problems.
Risks
Problems can arise in the insertion of the tube if the
Description
membrane lining the chest cavity is thick or if it has
Most patients are awake when the chest drainage many adhesions. The tube will not drain correctly if the
tube is inserted. They are given a sedative and a local chest cavity contains blood clots or thick secretions that
anesthetic. Chest drainage tubes are usually inserted are often associated with infections. Excessive bleeding
between the ribs. The exact location depends on the type may occur during the insertion and positioning of the
of material to be drained and its location in the lungs. tube. Infection may result from the procedure. Pain is
also a common complication.
An incision is made in the skin and through the mus-
cles between the ribs. A chest tube is inserted and
secured in place. The doctor connects one end of the tube Normal results
to the chest drainage system.
The gas,pus,or blood is drained from the chest cavity,
The chest drainage system must remain sealed to and the lungs reinflate or begin to function more efficiently.
prevent air from entering the chest cavity through the The site at which the tube was inserted heals normally.
tube. One commonly used system is a water-seal
drainage system,comprised of three compartments that
Resources
collect and drain the fluid or air without allowing air to
backflow into the tube. An alternative to this system is to BOOKS
connect the tube to a negative suction pump. “Chest Drainage Therapy.”In Everything You Need to Know
About Medical Treatments.Springhouse,PA:Springhouse
Once the tube and drainage system are in place, a
Corp.,1996.
chest x ray is done to confirm that the tube is in the right Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1998.37th ed. Ed.
location,and that it is working. In some cases it may be Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997.
744 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypareht
eganiard
tsehC
“Thoracostomy Tube Drainage.”In The Merck Manual of •collapsed lungs
Diagnosis and Therapy.16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rah-
•damaged chest walls
way,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,1992.
•tuberculosis
Tish Davidson •acute asthma
•recent heart attack Chest pain see Angina
•pulmonary embolism
•lung abscess
•active hemorrhage
Chest physical therapy
•some spine injuries
Definition •recent surgery,open wounds,or burns
Chest physical therapy is the term for a group of treat-
ments designed to improve respiratory efficiency,promote Description
expansion of the lungs, strengthen respiratory muscles, Chest physical therapy can be performed in a variety
and eliminate secretions from the respiratory system. of settings including critical care units,hospitals,nursing
homes, outpatient clinics, and at the patient’s home.
Purpose Depending on the circumstances,chest physical therapy
may be performed by anyone from a respiratory care ther-
The purpose of chest physical therapy, also called
apist to a trained member of the patient’s family. Different
chest physiotherapy, is to help patients breathe more
patient conditions warrant different levels of training.
freely and to get more oxygen into the body. Chest physi-
cal therapy includes postural drainage,chest percussion, Chest physical therapy consists of a variety of proce-
chest vibration, turning, deep breathing exercises, and dures that are applied depending on the patient’s health
coughing. It is usually done in conjunction with other and condition. Hospitalized patients are reevaluated fre-
treatments to rid the airways of secretions. These other quently to establish which procedures are most effective
treatments include suctioning,nebulizer treatments,and and best tolerated. Patients receiving long term chest phys-
the administration of expectorant drugs. ical therapy are reevaluated about every three months.
Chest physical therapy can be used with newborns,
Turning
infants, children, and adults. People who benefit from
chest physical therapy exhibit a wide range of problems Turning from side to side permits lung expansion.
that make it difficult to clear secretions from their lungs. Patients may turn themselves or be turned by a caregiver.
Some people who may receive chest physical therapy The head of the bed is also elevated to promote drainage
include people with cystic fibrosisor neuromuscular dis- if the patient can tolerate this position. Critically ill
eases like Guillain-Barré syndrome,progressive mus- patients and those dependent on mechanical respiration
cle weakness (myasthenia gravis),or tetanus. People are turned once every one to two hours around the clock.
with lung diseases such as bronchitis, pneumonia, or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) also ben- Coughing
efit from chest physical therapy. People who are likely to
Coughing helps break up secretions in the lungs so
aspirate their mucous secretions because of diseases such
that the mucus can be suctioned out or expectorated.
as cerebral palsyor muscular dystrophyalso receive
Patients sit upright and inhale deeply through the nose.
chest physical therapy, as do some people who are
They then exhale in short puffs or coughs. Coughing is
bedridden, confined to a wheelchair, or who cannot
repeated several times a day.
breathe deeply because of postoperative pain.
Deep breathing
Precautions
Deep breathing helps expand the lungs and forces
Chest physical therapy should not be performed on better distribution of the air into all sections of the lung.
people with The patient either sits in a chair or sits upright in bed and
inhales, pushing the abdomen out to force maximum
•bleeding from the lungs
amounts of air into the lung. The abdomen is then con-
•neck or head injuries
tracted,and the patient exhales. Deep breathing exercises
•fractured ribs are done several times each day for short periods.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 745
Chest
physical
therapy
KEY TERMS
Coughing—Coughing helps break up secretions in they can either be coughed up or suctioned out. The
the lungs so that the mucus can be suctioned out or patient is placed in a head or chest down position
expectorated. Patients sit upright and inhale deeply and is kept in this position for up to 15 minutes. Crit-
through the nose. They then exhale in short puffs or ical care patients and those depending on mechani-
coughs. Coughing is repeated several times per day. cal ventilation receive postural draingage therapy
four to six times daily. Percussion and vibration may
Deep breathing—Deep breathing helps expand the
be performed in conjunction with postural drainage.
lungs and forces better distribution of the air into all
sections of the lung. The patient either sits in a chair Turning—Turning from side to side permits lung
or sits upright in bed and inhales, pushing the expansion. Patients may turn themselves or be
abdomen out to force maximum amounts of air into turned by a caregiver. The head of the bed is also
the lung. The abdomen is then contracted, and the elevated to promote drainage if the patient can tol-
patient exhales. Deep breathing exercises are done erate this position. Critically ill patients and those
several times each day for short periods. dependent on mechanical respiration are turned
once every one to two hours around the clock.
Percussion—This consists of rhythmically striking
Vibration—The purpose of vibration is to help
the chest wall with cupped hands. It is also called
break up lung secretions. Vibration can be either
cupping, clapping, or tapotement. The purpose of
mechanical or manual. It is performed as the
percussion is to break up thick secretions in the
patient breathes deeply. When done manually, the
lungs so that they can be more easily removed. Per-
person performing the vibration places his or her
cussion is performed on each lung segment for one
hands against the patient’s chest and creates vibra-
to two minutes at a time.
tions by quickly contracting and relaxing arm and
Postural drainage—This technique uses the force of shoulder muscles while the patient exhales. The
gravity to assist in effectively draining secretions procedure is repeated several times each day for
from the lungs and into the central airway where about five exhalations.
Postural drainage mechanical or manual. It is performed as the patient
breathes deeply. When done manually, the person per-
Postural drainage uses the force of gravity to assist
forming the vibration places his or her hands against the
in effectively draining secretions from the lungs and into
patient’s chest and creates vibrations by quickly contract-
the central airway where they can either be coughed up
ing and relaxing arm and shoulder muscles while the
or suctioned out. The patient is placed in a head or chest
patient exhales. The procedure is repeated several times
down position and is kept in this position for up to 15
each day for about five exhalations.
minutes. Critical care patients and those depending on
mechanical ventilation receive postural drainage therapy
four to six times daily. Percussion and vibration may be Preparation
performed in conjunction with postural drainage. The only preparation needed for chest physical ther-
apy is an evaluation of the patient’s condition and deter-
Percussion mination of which chest physical therapy techniques
Percussion is rhythmically striking the chest wall would be most beneficial.
with cupped hands. It is also called cupping,clapping,or
tapotement. The purpose of percussion is to break up Aftercare
thick secretions in the lungs so that they can be more eas-
Patients practice oral hygieneprocedures to lessen
ily removed. Percussion is performed on each lung seg-
the bad taste or odor of the secretions they spit out.
ment for one to two minutes at a time.
Vibration Risks
As with percussion, the purpose of vibration is to Risks and complications associated with chest phys-
help break up lung secretions. Vibration can be either ical therapy depend on the health of the patient. Although
746 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypareht
lacisyhp
tsehC
chest physical therapy usually poses few problems, in
some patients it may cause
•oxygen deficiency if the head is kept lowered for
drainage
•increased intracranial pressure
•temporary low blood pressure
•bleeding in the lungs
•pain or injury to the ribs,muscles,or spine
•vomiting
•inhaling secretions into the lungs
•heart irregularities
Normal results
The patient is considered to be responding positively
to chest physical therapy if some,but not necessarily all,
of these changes occur:
•increased volume of sputum secretions
•changes in breath sounds
•improved vital signs
•improved chest x ray that can penetrate the body and produce an image on an
•increased oxygen in the blood as measured by arterial x-ray film. Another name for x ray is radiograph.
blood gas values
Purpose
•patient reports of eased breathing
Chest x rays are ordered for a wide variety of diag-
nostic purposes. In fact,this is probably the most frequent-
Resources
ly performed x ray. In some cases,chest x rays are ordered
PERIODICALS
for a single check of an organ’s condition, and at other
“AARC Clinical Practical Guideline:Postural Drainage.”Res-
times, serial x rays are ordered to compare to previous
piratory Care36 (1991):1418-1426.
studies. Some common reasons for chest x rays include:
ORGANIZATIONS
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. 6931 Arlington Road,Bethesda, Pulmonary disorders
MD 20814. (800) 344-4823. <http://www.cff.org>.
Chest films are frequently ordered to diagnose or
rule out pneumonia. Other pulmonary disorders such as
Tish Davidson
emphysemaor pneumothorax(presence of air or gas in
the chest cavity outside the lungs) may be detected or
Chest radiography see Chest x ray
evaluated through the use of chest x ray.
Cancer
A chest x ray may be ordered by a physician to
check for possible tumors of the lungs,thyroid,lymphoid
Chest x ray tissue, or bones of the thorax. These may be primary
tumors. X rays also check for secondary spread of can-
Definition
cerfrom one organ to another.
A chest x ray is a procedure used to evaluate organs
Cardiac disorders
and structures within the chest for symptoms of disease.
Chest x rays include views of the lungs,heart,small por- While less sensitive than echocardiography,chest x
tions of the gastrointestinal tract,thyroid gland and the ray can be used to check for disorders such as congestive
bones of the chest area. X rays are a form of radiation heart failureor pulmonary edema.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 747
Chest
x
ray
A normal chest x ray of a child.(Photograph by Peter Berndt,
M.D., P.A, Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by per-
mission.)
Precautions
KEY TERMS
Pregnant women, particularly those in the first or
second trimester, should not have chest x rays unless
Bronchi—Plural of bronchus. The air passages in
absolutely necessary. If the exam is ordered,women who
the lungs through which inhaled air passes on its
are,or could possibly be,pregnant must wear a protec-
way to the lungs.
tive lead apron. Because the procedure involves radia-
Diaphragm—The large muscle that is located tion,care should always be taken to avoid overexposure,
between the abdomen and the chest area. The particularly for children. However,the amount of radia-
diaphragm aids in breathing. tion from one chest x ray procedure is minimal.
Gastrointestinal—The digestive organs and struc-
tures, including the stomach and intestines. Description
Interstitial lung disease—About 180 diseases fall
Routine chest x rays consist of two views,the frontal
into this category of breathing disorders. Injury or
view (referred to as posterioranterior or PA),and the lat-
foreign substances in the lungs, (such as asbestos
eral (side) view. It is preferred that the patient stand for
fibers) as well as infections, cancers, or inherited
this exam,particularly when studying collection of fluid
disorders may cause the diseases. They can lead to
in the lungs.
breathing or heart failure.
During the actual time of exposure,the technologist
Lymphoid—Tissues relating to the lymphatic sys-
will ask the patient to hold his or her breath. It is very
tem. A thin, yellowish fluid, called lymph fluid,
important in taking a chest x ray to ensure there is no
travels throughout the body. The lymphatic system
motion that could detract from the quality and sharpness
helps control fluids in the body.
of the film image. The procedure will only take a few
Portable chest x ray—An x ray procedure taken by minutes and the time patients must hold their breaths is a
equipment that can be brought to the patient. The matter of a few seconds.
resulting radiographs may not be as high in quality
The chest x ray may be performed in a physician’s
as stationary x ray radiographs, but allow a tech-
office or referred to an outpatient radiology facility or
nologist to come to the bedridden patient.
hospital radiology department. In some cases,particular-
Pulmonary—Refers to the lungs and the breathing ly for bedridden patients,a portable chest x ray may be
system and function. taken. Portable films are sometimes of poorer quality
than those taken with permanent equipment,but are the
Serial x rays—A number of x rays performed at set
best choice for some patients or situations. Bedridden
times in the disease progression or treatment inter-
patients may be placed in as upright a position as possi-
vals. The radiographs will be compared to one
ble to get a clear picture,particularly of chest fluid.
another to track changes.
Sternum—Also referred to as the breast bone, this
is the long flat bone in the middle of the chest. Preparation
Thorax—The chest area, which runs between the There is no advance preparation necessary for chest
abdomen and neck and is encased in the ribs. x rays. Once the patient arrives at the exam area,a hospi-
tal gown will replace all clothing on the upper body and
X ray—A form of electromagnetic radiation with
all jewelry must be removed.
shorter wavelengths than normal light. X rays can
penetrate most structures.
Aftercare
No aftercare is required by patients who have chest x
rays.
Other
Tuberculosis can be observed on chest x rays, as
Risks
can cardiac disease and damage to the ribs or lungs.
Chest x rays are used to see foreign bodies that may The only risk associated with chest x ray is minimal
have been swallowed or inhaled, and to evaluate exposure to radiation,particularly for pregnant women
response to treatment for various diseases. Often the and children. Those patients should use protective lead
chest x ray is also used to verify correct placement of aprons during the procedure. Technologists are cautioned
chest tubes or catheters. to carefully check possible dislodging of any tubes or
748 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yar
x
tsehC
monitors in the chest area from the patient’s placement also be indicated by elevation of the diaphragm. Foreign
during the exam. bodies which may have been swallowed or inhaled can
usually be located by the radiologist as they will look dif-
ferent from any other tissue or structure in the chest. Ser-
Normal results
ial chest x rays may be ordered to track changes over a
A radiologist,or physician specially trained in the period of time.
technique and interpretation of x rays,will evaluate the
results. A normal chest x ray will show normal structures Resources
for the age and medical history or the patient. Findings,
ORGANIZATIONS
whether normal or abnormal, will be provided to the
American Lung Association. 1740 Broadway,New York,NY
referring physician in the form of a written report.
10019. (800) 586-4872. <http://www.lungusa.org>.
Emphysema Anonymous,Inc. P.O. Box 3224,Seminole,FL
Abnormal results 34642. (813)391-9977.
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
Abnormal findings on chest x rays are used in con- Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
junction with a physician’s physical exam findings, www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
patient medical history and other diagnostic tests to reach
a final diagnosis. For many diseases, chest x rays are Teresa Norris,RN
more effective when compared to previous chest studies.
The patient is asked to help the radiology facility in
locating previous chest radiographs from other facilities.
Pulmonary disorders Chickenpox
Pneumonia shows up on radiographs as patches and Definition
irregular areas of density (from fluid in the lungs). If the
Chickenpox (also called varicella) is a common and
bronchi, which are usually not visible, can be seen, a
extremely infectious childhood disease that also affects
diagnosis of bronchial pneumonia may be made. Shifts or
adults on occasion. It produces an itchy,blistery rash that
shadows in the hila (lung roots) may indicate emphysema
typically lasts about a week and is sometimes accompa-
or a pulmonary abscess. Widening of the spaces between
nied by a fever or other symptoms. A single attack of
ribs suggests emphysema. Other pulmonary diseases may
chickenpox almost always confers lifelong immunity
also be detected or suspected through chest x ray.
against the disease. Because the symptoms of chicken-
pox are easily recognized and in most cases merely
Cancer
unpleasant rather than dangerous,treatment can almost
In nearly all patients with lung cancer,some sort of always be carried out at home. Severe complications can
abnormality can be seen on a chest radiograph. Hilar develop,however,and professional medical attention is
masses (enlargements at that part of the lungs where ves- essential in some circumstances.
sels and nerves enter) are one of the more common
symptoms as are abnormal masses and fluid buildup on Description
the outside surface of the lungs or surrounding areas.
Before the varicella vaccine (Varivax) was released
Interstitial lung disease,which is a large category of dis-
for use in 1995,virtually all of the four million children
orders, many of which are related to exposure of sub-
born each year in the United States contracted chicken-
stances (such as asbestos fibers),may be detected on a
pox, resulting in hospitalization in five of every 1,000
chest x ray as fiberlike deposits,often in the lower por-
cases and 100 deaths. Chickenpox is caused by the vari-
tions of the lungs.
cella-zoster virus (a member of the herpes virus family),
which is spread through the air or by direct contact with
Other
an infected person. Once someone has been infected with
Congestive heart failure and other cardiac diseases the virus,an incubation period of about 10–21 days pass-
may be indicated on the view of a heart and lung in a es before symptoms begin. The period during which
chest radiograph. Fracturesof the sternum and ribs are infected people are able to spread the disease is believed
usually easily detected as breaks on the chest x ray. In to start one or two days before the rash breaks out and to
some instances,the radiologist’s view of the diaphragm continue until all the blisters have formed scabs,which
may indicate an abdominal problem. Tuberculosis can usually happens fout to seven days after the rash breaks
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 749
Chickenpox
out but may be longer in adolescents and adults. For this at risk of deathfrom chickenpox than any other group.
reason,doctors recommend keeping children with chick- Under certain circumstances,children born to mothers
enpox away from school for about a week. It is not nec- who contract chickenpox just prior to delivery face an
essary,however,to wait until all the scabs have fallen off. increased possibility of dangerous consequences,
including brain damage and death. If the infection
Chickenpox has been a typical part of growing up for
occurs during early pregnancy, there is a small (less
most children in the industrialized world (although this
than 5%) risk of congenital abnormalities.
may change if the new varicella vaccine becomes more
widely accepted). The disease can strike at any age,but •Immunocompromised children. Children whose
by ages nine or 10 about 80–90% of American children immune systems have been weakened by a genetic dis-
have already been infected. U.S. children living in rural order,disease,or medical treatment usually experience
areas and many foreign-born children are less likely to be the most severe symptoms of any group. They have the
immune. Because almost every case of chickenpox, no second-highest rate of death from chickenpox.
matter how mild,leads to lifelong protection against fur-
•Adults and children 15 and older. Among this group,
ther attacks,adults account for less than 5% of all cases in
the typical symptoms of chickenpox tend to strike with
the United States. Study results reported by the Centers
greater force, and the risk of complications is much
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) indicate that
higher than among young children.
more than 90% of American adults are immune to the
Immediate medical help should always be sought
chickenpox virus. Adults,however,are much more likely
when anyone in these high-risk groups contracts the dis-
than children to suffer dangerous complications. More
ease.
than half of all chickenpox deaths occur among adults.
Diagnosis
Causes and symptoms
Where children are concerned,especially those with
A case of chickenpox usually starts without warning
recent exposure to the disease,diagnosis can usually be
or with only a mild fever and a slight feeling of unwellness.
made at home,by a school nurse,or by a doctor over the
Within a few hours or days small red spots begin to appear
telephone if the child’s parent or caregiver is unsure that
on the scalp,neck,or upper half of the trunk. After a further
the disease is chickenpox.
12–24 hours the spots typically become itchy,fluid-filled
A doctor should be called immediately if:
bumps called vesicles,which continue to appear in crops
for the next two to five days. In any area of skin,lesions of •The child’s fever goes above 102°F (38.9°C) or takes
a variety of stages can be seen. These blisters can spread to more than four days to disappear.
cover much of the skin, and in some cases may also be
•The child’s blisters appear infected. Signs of infection
found inside the mouth, nose, ears, vagina, or rectum.
include leakage of pus from the blisters or excessive
Some people develop only a few blisters,but in most cases
redness, warmth, tenderness, or swelling around the
the number reaches 250–500. The blisters soon begin to
blisters.
form scabs and fall off. Scarring usually does not occur
unless the blisters have been scratched and become infect- •The child seems nervous, confused, unresponsive, or
ed. Occasionally a minor and temporary darkening of the unusually sleepy; complains of a stiff neck or severe
skin (called hyperpigmentation) is noticed around some headache; shows signs of poor balance or has trouble
of the blisters. The degree of itchiness can range from bare- walking; finds bright lights hard to look at; is having
ly noticeable to extreme. Some chickenpox sufferers also breathing problems or is coughing a lot; is complaining
have headaches,abdominal pain,or a fever. Full recovery of chest pain; is vomiting repeatedly; or is having con-
usually takes five to 10 days after the first symptoms vulsions. These may be signs of Reye’s syndromeor
appear. Again,the most severe cases of the disease tend to encephalitis, two rare but potentially very dangerous
be found among older children and adults. conditions.
Although for most people chickenpox is no more
Treatment
than a matter of a few days’discomfort,some groups are
at risk for developing complications,the most common With children,treatment usually takes place in the
of which are bacterial infections of the blisters,pneumo- home and focuses on reducing discomfort and fever.
nia,dehydration,encephalitis,and hepatitis: Because chickenpox is a viral disease, antibiotics are
ineffective against it.
•Infants. Complications occur much more often among
children less than one year old than among older chil- Applying wet compresses or bathing the child in cool
dren. The threat is greatest to newborns,who are more or lukewarm water once a day can help the itch. Adding
750 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
xopnekcihC
four to eight ounces of baking soda or one or two cups of
oatmeal to the bath is a good idea (oatmeal bath packets
are sold by pharmacies). Only mild soap should be used
in the bath. Patting,not rubbing,is recommended for dry-
ing the child off, to prevent irritating the blisters.
Calamine lotion (and some other kinds of lotions) also
help to reduce itchiness. Because scratching can cause
blisters to become infected and lead to scarring, the
child’s nails should be cut short. Of course,older children
need to be warned not to scratch. For babies,light mittens
or socks on the hands can help guard against scratching.
If mouth blisters make eating or drinking an
unpleasant experience,cold drinks and soft,bland foods
can ease the child’s discomfort. Painful genital blisters
can be treated with an anesthetic cream recommended by
a doctor or pharmacist. Antibiotics are often prescribed if
blisters become infected.
Fever and discomfort can be reduced by aceta-
minophenor another medication that does not contain
aspirin. Aspirin and any medications that contain
aspirin or other salicylates must not be used with chick-
enpox,for they appear to increase the chances of devel-
oping Reye’s syndrome.The best idea is to consult a doc-
tor or pharmacist if one is unsure about which medica-
tions are safe.
Immunocompromised chickenpox sufferers are
sometimes given an antiviral drug called acyclovir (Zovi-
rax). Studies have shown that Zovirax also lessens the
symptoms of otherwise healthy children and adults who
contract chickenpox,but the suggestion that it should be
used to treat the disease among the general population,
especially in children,is controversial.
Alternative treatment
Alternative practitioners seek to lessen the discom-
fort and fever caused by chickenpox. Like other practi- one long-term consequence of chickenpox that strikes
tioners,they suggest cool or lukewarm baths. Rolled oats about 20% of the population,particularly people 50 and
(Avena sativa) in the bath water help relieve itching. older. Like all herpes viruses,the varicella-zoster virus
(Place oats in a sock, run the bath, turn the sock to never leaves the body after an episode of chickenpox,but
release the milky anti-itch properties.) Other recom- lies dormant in the nerve cells,where it may be reactivat-
mended remedies for itching include applying aloe vera, ed years later by disease or age-related weakening of the
witch hazel,or herbal preparations of rosemary (Rosmar- immune system. The result is shingles(also called her-
inus officinalis) and calendula (Calendual officinalis) to pes zoster),a very painful nerve inflammation,accompa-
the blisters. Homeopathic remedies are selected on a case nied by a rash,that usually affects the trunk or the face
by case basis. Some common remedy choices are tartar for 10 days or more. Especially in the elderly, pain,
emetic (antimonium tartaricum),windflower (pulsatilla), called postherpetic neuralgia,may persist at the site of
poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron),and sulphur. the shingles for months or years. As of 1998,two newer
drugs for treatment of shingles are available. Both vala-
cyclovir (Valtrex) and famciclovir (Famvir) stop the
Prognosis
replication of herpes zoster when administered within 72
Most cases of chickenpox run their course within a hours of appearance of the rash. The effectiveness of
week without causing lasting harm. However, there is these two drugs in immunocompromised patients has not
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 751
Chickenpox
A five-year-old girl with chickenpox.The first symptom of
the disease is the rash that is evident on the girl’s back and
neck.The rash and the mild fever that accompanies it
should disappear in a week or two.(Photograph by Jim Selby,
Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Acetaminophen—A drug for relieving pain and Salicylates—Substances containing salicylic acid,
fever. Tylenol is the most common example. which are used for relieving pain and fever. Aspirin
is the most common example.
Acyclovir—An antiviral drug used for combating
chickenpox and other herpes viruses. Sold under Shingles—A disease (also called herpes zoster) that
the name Zovirax. causes a rash and a very painful nerve inflamma-
tion. An attack of chickenpox will eventually give
Dehydration—Excessive water loss by the body.
rise to shingles in about 20% of the population.
Encephalitis—A disease that inflames the brain.
Trunk—That part of the body that does not include
Hepatitis—A disease that inflames the liver. the head, arms, and legs.
Immune system—A biochemical complex that pro- Varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG)—A sub-
tects the body against pathogenic organisms and stance that can reduce the severity of chickenpox
other foreign bodies. symptoms.
Varicella-zoster virus—The virus that causes chick-
Immunocompromised—Having a damaged immune
enpox and shingles.
system.
Varivax—A vaccine for the prevention of chicken-
Pneumonia—A disease that inflames the lungs.
pox.
Pus—A thick yellowish or greenish fluid containing
Virus—A tiny particle that can cause infections by
inflammatory cells. Usually caused by bacterial
duplicating itself inside a cell using the cell’s own
infection.
software. Antibiotics are ineffective against viruses,
Reye’s syndrome—A rare but often fatal disease that though antiviral drugs exist for some viruses,
involves the brain, liver, and kidneys. including chickenpox.
been established, and Famvir is not recommended for receive their measles-mumps-rubella vaccine. For older
patients under 18 years,as of 1998. children,up to age 12,the CDC recommends vaccina-
tion when a reliable determination that the child in
question has already had chickenpox cannot be made.
Prevention Vaccination is also recommended for any older child or
adult considered susceptible to the disease,particularly
A substance known as varicella-zoster immune
those,such as health care workers and women of child-
globulin (VZIG),which reduces the severity of chick-
bearing age,who face a greater likelihood of severe ill-
enpox symptoms,is available to treat immunocompro-
ness or transmitting infection. A single dose of the vac-
mised children and others at high risk of developing
cine is sufficient for children up to age 12; older chil-
complications. It is administered by injection within
dren and adults receive a second dose four to eight
96 hours of known or suspected exposure to the dis-
weeks later. In 1997 the cost of two adult doses of the
ease and is not useful after that. VZIG is produced as a
vaccine in the United States was about $80. Although
gamma globulin from blood of recently infected indi-
this cost was not always covered by health insurance
viduals.
plans, children up to age 18 without access to the
A vaccine for chickenpox became available in the appropriate coverage could be vaccinated free of charge
United States in 1995 under the name Varivax. Varivax through the federal Vaccines for Children program.
is a live, attenuated (weakened) virus vaccine. It has Varivax is not given to patients who already have overt
been proven to be 85% effective for preventing all cases signs of the disease. The vaccine is also not recom-
of chickenpox and close to 100% effective in prevent- mended for those women who are pregnant, or they
ing severe cases. Side effects are normally limited to should delay pregnancy for three months following a
occasional soreness or redness at the injection site. complete vaccination. The vaccine is useful when given
CDC guidelines state that the vaccine should be given early after exposure to chickenpox and,if given in the
to all children (with the exception of certain high-risk midst of the incubation period,it can be preventative.
groups) at 12–18 months of age,preferably when they The Infectious Diseases Society of America stated in
752 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
xopnekcihC
2000 that immunization is recommended for all adults
who have never had chickenpox. Child abuse
While there was initial concern regarding the vac-
Definition
cine’s safety and effectiveness when first released,the
vaccination is gaining acceptance as numerous states Child abuse is the blanket term for four types of
require it for admittance into day care or public school. child mistreatment:physical abuse,sexual abuse,emo-
In 2000, 59% of toddlers in the United States were tional abuse,and neglect. In many cases children are the
immunized; up from 43.2% in 1998. A study published victims of more than one type of abuse. The abusers can
in 2001 indicates that the varicella vaccine is highly be parents or other family members,caretakers such as
effective when used in clinical practice. Although evi- teachers and babysitters,acquaintances (including other
dence has not ruled out a booster shot later in life, all children),and (in rare instances) strangers.
research addressing the vaccine’s effectiveness through-
out its six-year use indicates that chickenpox may be
Description
the first human herpesvirus to be wiped out. Although
initial concerns questioned if the vaccination might Prevalence of abuse
make shingles more likely, studies are beginning to
Child abuse was once viewed as a minor social prob-
show the effectiveness of the vaccine in reducing cases
lem affecting only a handful of United States children.
of that disease.
However,in recent years it has received close attention from
the media,law enforcement,and the helping professions,
Resources and with increased public and professional awareness has
come a sharp rise in the number of reported cases. But
BOOKS
because abuse is often hidden from view and its victims too
The Burton Goldberg Group. Alternative Medicine:The Defin-
young or fearful to speak out,experts suggest that its true
itive Guide.Puyallup,WA:Future Medicine Publishing,
prevalence is possibly much greater than the official data
1993.
indicate. In 1996,more than three million victims of alleged
Pattishall,Evan G.,III. “Chickenpox.”In Primary Pediatric
Care,edited by Robert A. Hoekelman,et al. St. Louis: abuse were reported to child protective services (CPS) agen-
Mosby,1997. cies in the United States,and the reports were substantiated
in more than one million cases. Put another way,1.5% of
PERIODICALS the country’s children were confirmed victims of abuse in
Arvin,Ann M. “Varicella Vaccine—The First Six Years.”New 1996. Parents were the abusers in 77% of the confirmed
England Journal of Medicine344,no. 13 (March 2001). cases,other relatives in 11%. Sexual abuse was more likely
Henderson,C. W. “Chickenpox Immunization Confirmed Effec- to be committed by males,whereas females were responsi-
tive in Adults.”Vaccine Weekly(September 2000):22.
ble for the majority of neglect cases. More than 1,000 Unit-
Shapiro,Eugene D.,and Phillip S. LaRussa. “Vaccination for
ed States children died from abuse in 1996.
Varicella—Just Do It!”Journal of the American Medical
Association278 (1997):1529-1530. Although experts are quick to point out that abuse
occurs among all social, ethnic, and income groups,
ORGANIZATION reported cases usually involve poor families with little
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Immu- education. Young mothers, single-parent families, and
nization Hotline. 1600 Clifton Rd. NE,Atlanta,GA parental alcohol or drug abuse are also common in report-
30333. (800) 232-2522 (English). (800) 232-0233 (Span- ed cases. Charles F. Johnson remarks,“More than 90% of
ish). <http://www.cdc.gov>.
abusing parents have neither psychotic nor criminal per-
sonalities. Rather they tend to be lonely,unhappy,angry,
OTHER
young,and single parents who do not plan their pregnan-
ABCNEWS.com. “Varicella Vaccine:States Mandate Chicken-
cies,have little or no knowledge of child development,and
pox Immunization.”1 August 2000. <http://abcnews.go.
have unrealistic expectations for child behavior.”About
com/sections/living/DailyNews/chickenpox_vaccine0802.
10%,or perhaps as many as 40%,of abusive parents were
html>. (3 May 2001).
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Prevention of themselves physically abused as children,but most abused
Varicella:Recommendations of the Advisory Committee children do not grow up to be abusive parents.
on Immunization Practices (ACIP).”12 July 1996. <http://
aepo-xdv-www.epo.cdc.gov/wonder/prevguid/m0042990/
Types of abuse
entire.htm>. (12 December 1997).
PHYSICAL ABUSE. Physical abuse is the nonacciden-
Beth Kapes tal infliction of physical injury to a child. The abuser is
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 753
Child
abuse
usually a family member or other caretaker,and is more burns. Skull and other bone fracturesare often seen
likely to be male. In 1996,24% of the confirmed cases of in young abused children,and in fact,head injuries are
United Stateschild abuse involved physical abuse. the leading cause of death from abuse. Children less
A rare form of physical abuse is Munchausen syn- than one year old are particularly vulnerable to injury
drome by proxy, in which a caretaker (most often the from shaking. This is called shaken baby syndrome
mother) seeks attention by making the child sick or or shaken impact syndrome. Not surprisingly,physical
appear to be sick. abuse also causes a wide variety of behavioral changes
in children.
SEXUAL ABUSE. Charles F. Johnson defines child
sexual abuse as “any activity with a child,before the age
Sexual abuse
of legal consent,that is for the sexual gratification of an
adult or a significantly older child.”It includes,among John M. Leventhal observes,“The two prerequisites
other things,sexual touching and penetration,persuading for this form of maltreatment include sexual arousal to
a child to expose his or her sexual organs,and allowing a children and the willingness to act on this arousal. Fac-
child to view pornography. In most cases the child is tors that may contribute to this willingness include alco-
related to or knows the abuser, and about one in five hol or drug abuse,poor impulse control,and a belief that
abusers are themselves underage. Sexual abuse was pre- the sexual behaviors are acceptable and not harmful to
sent in 12% of the confirmed 1996 abuse cases. An esti- the child.”The chances of abuse are higher if the child is
mated 20–25% of females and 10–15% of males report developmentally handicapped or vulnerable in some
that they were sexually abused by age 18. other way.
EMOTIONAL ABUSE. Emotional abuse,according to Genital or anal injuries or abnormalities (including
Richard D. Krugman,“has been defined as the rejection, the presence of sexually transmitted diseases) can be
ignoring,criticizing,isolation,or terrorizing of children, signs of sexual abuse,but often there is no physical evi-
all of which have the effect of eroding their self-esteem.” dence for a doctor to find. In fact,physical examinations
Emotional abuse usually expresses itself in verbal attacks of children in cases of suspected sexual abuse supply
involving rejection, scapegoating, belittlement, and so grounds for further suspicion only 15–20% of the time.
forth. Because it often accompanies other types of abuse Anxiety,poor academic performance,and suicidal con-
and is difficult to prove, it is rarely reported, and duct are some of the behavioral signs of sexual abuse,but
accounted for only 6% of the confirmed 1996 cases. are also found in children suffering other kinds of stress.
Excessive masturbation and other unusually sexualized
NEGLECT. Neglect—failure to satisfy a child’s basic
kinds of behavior are more closely associated with sexu-
needs—can assume many forms. Physical neglect is the
al abuse itself.
failure (beyond the constraints imposed by poverty) to
provide adequate food,clothing,shelter,or supervision.
Emotional neglect is the failure to satisfy a child’s nor- Emotional abuse
mal emotional needs,or behavior that damages a child’s
Emotional abuse can happen in many settings: at
normal emotional and psychological development (such
home,at school,on sports teams,and so on. Some of the
as permitting drug abuse in the home). Failing to see that
possible symptoms include loss of self-esteem,sleep dis-
a child receives proper schooling or medical care is also
turbances, headaches or stomachaches, school avoid-
considered neglect. In 1996 neglect was the finding in
ance,and running away from home.
52% of the confirmed abuse cases.
Neglect
Causes and symptoms
Many cases of neglect occur because the parent
Physical abuse
experiences strong negative feelings toward the child.
The usual physical abuse scenario involves a parent At other times, the parent may truly care about the
who loses control and lashes out at a child. The trigger child,but lack the ability or strength to adequately pro-
may be normal child behavior such as crying or dirtying vide for the child’s needs because he or she is handi-
a diaper. Unlike nonabusive parents,who may become capped by depression,drug abuse,mental retardation,
angry at or upset with their children from time to time or some other problem.
but are genuinely loving,abusive parents tend to harbor
Neglected children often do not receive adequate
deep-rooted negative feelings toward their children.
nourishment or emotional and mental stimulation. As a
Unexplained or suspicious bruisesor other marks result, their physical, social, emotional, and mental
on the skin are typical signs of physical abuse,as are development is hindered. They may, for instance, be
754 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esuba
dlihC
underweight,develop language skills less quickly than involving medical personnel, social workers, police
other children,and seem emotionally needy. officers,and others. Some hospitals and communities
maintain child protection teams that respond to cases
of possible abuse. Careful questioning of the parents
Diagnosis
is crucial, as is interviewing the child (if he or she is
Doctors and many other professionals who work capable of being interviewed). The investigators
with children are required by law to report suspected must ensure, however, that their questioning does not
abuse to their state’s Child Protective Services (CPS) further traumatize the child. A physical examination
agency. Abuse investigations are often a group effort for signs of abuse or neglect is, of course, always
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 755
Child
abuse
Child Abuse: Signs And Symptoms
Although these signs do not necessarily indicate that a child has been abused, they may help adults recognize that something is wrong. The possibility of abuse
should be investigated if a child shows a number of these symptoms, or any of them to a marked degree:
Sexual Abuse
Being overly affectionate or knowledgeable in a sexual way inappropriate to the child’s age
Medical problems such as chronic itching, pain in the genitals, venereal diseases
Other extreme reactions, such as depression, self-mutilation, suicide attempts, running away, overdoses, anorexia
Personality changes such as becoming insecure or clinging
Regressing to younger behavior patterns such as thumb sucking or bringing out discarded cuddly toys
Sudden loss of appetite or compulsive eating
Being isolated or withdrawn
Inability to concentrate
Lack of trust or fear someone they know well, such as not wanting to be alone with a babysitter
Starting to wet again, day or night/nightmares
Become worried about clothing being removed
Suddenly drawing sexually explicit pictures
Trying to be “ultra-good” or perfect; overreacting to criticism
Physical Abuse
Unexplained recurrent injuries or burns
Improbable excuses or refusal to explain injuries
Wearing clothes to cover injuries, even in hot weather
Refusal to undress for gym
Bald patches
Chronic running away
Fear of medical help or examination
Self-destructive tendencies
Aggression towards others
Fear of physical contact—shrinking back if touched
Admitting that they are punished, but the punishment is excessive (such as a child being beaten every night to “make him/her study”)
Fear of suspected abuser being contacted
Emotional Abuse
Physical, mental, and emotional development lags
Sudden speech disorders
Continual self-depreciation (“I’m stupid, ugly, worthless, etc.”)
Overreaction to mistakes
Extreme fear of any new situation
Inappropriate response to pain (“I deserve this”)
Neurotic behavior (rocking, hair twisting, self-mutilation)
Extremes of passivity or aggression
Neglect
Constant hunger
Poor personal hygiene
No social relationships
Constant tiredness
Poor state of clothing
Compulsive scavenging
Emaciation
Untreated medical problems
Destructive tendencies
A child may be subjected to a combination of different kinds of abuse. It is also possible that a child may show no outward signs and hide what is happening from
everyone.
necessary, and may include x rays, blood tests, and support groups and other organizations that help abused
other procedures. and at-risk children and their families. One of these orga-
nizations,National Parents Anonymous,sponsors 2,100
local self-help groups throughout the United States,
Treatment
Canada, and Europe. Telephone numbers for its local
Notification of the appropriate authorities,treatment groups are listed in the white pages of the telephone book
of the child’s injuries,and protecting the child from fur- under Parents Anonymous or can be obtained by calling
ther harm are the immediate priorities in abuse cases. If the national headquarters.
the child does not require hospital treatment,protection
often involves placing him or her with relatives or in fos-
Resources
ter care. Once the immediate concerns are dealt with,it
becomes essential to determine how the child’s long- BOOKS
term medical, psychological, educational, and other Johnson,Charles F. “Abuse and Neglect of Children.”In Nel-
son Textbook of Pediatrics,ed. Richard E. Behrman.
needs can best be met,a process that involves evaluating
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
not only the child’s needs but also the family’s (such as
Krugman,Richard D. “Child Abuse & Neglect.”In Pediatric
for drug abuse counseling or parental skills training). If
Diagnosis & Treatment,ed. William W. Hay Jr.,et al.
the child has brothers or sisters, the authorities must
Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997.
determine whether they have been abused as well. On
Leventhal,John M. “Child Maltreatment:Neglect to Abuse.”In
investigation,signs of physical abuse are discovered in Rudolph’s Pediatric,ed. Abraham M. Rudolph,et al.
about 20% of the brothers and sisters of abused children. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1996.
ORGANIZATIONS
Prognosis Childhelp USA/IOF Foresters National Child Abuse Hotline.
(800) 422-4453.
Child abuse can have lifelong consequences.
National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect Informa-
Research shows that abused children and adolescents are
tion. P.O. Box 1182,Washington,DC 20013-1182. (800)
more likely,for instance, to do poorly in school,suffer
394-3366. <http://www.calib.com/nccanch>.
emotional problems, develop an antisocial personality, National Committee to Prevent Child Abuse. 200 S. Michigan
become promiscuous, abuse drugs and alcohol, and Ave.,17th Floor,Chicago,IL 60604. (312) 663-3520.
attempt suicide. As adults they often have trouble estab- <http://www.childabuse.org>.
lishing intimate relationships. Whether professional treat- National Parents Anonymous. 675 W. Foothill Blvd.,Suite 220,
ment is able to moderate the long-term psychological Claremont,CA 91711. (909) 621-6184.
effects of abuse is a question that remains unanswered.
Howard Baker
Prevention
Child development see Children’s health
Government efforts to prevent abuse include home-
Child safety see Children’s health
visitor programs aimed at high-risk families and school-
based efforts to teach children how to respond to attempt-
ed sexual abuse. Emotional abuse prevention has been
promoted through the media.
When children reach age three,parents should begin
Childbirth
teaching them about “bad touches”and about confiding
in a suitable adult if they are touched or treated in a way
Definition
that makes them uneasy. Parents also need to exercise
caution in hiring babysitters and other caretakers. Any- Childbirth includes both labor (the process of birth)
one who suspects abuse should immediately report those and delivery (the birth itself); it refers to the entire
suspicions to the police or his or her local CPS agency, process as an infant makes its way from the womb down
which will usually be listed in the blue pages of the tele- the birth canal to the outside world.
phone book under Rehabilitative Services or Child and
Family Services, or in the yellow pages. Round-the-
Description
clock crisis counseling for children and adults is offered
by the Childhelp USA/IOF Foresters National Child Childbirth usually begins spontaneously,following
Abuse Hotline. The National Committee to Prevent Child about 280 days after conception,but it may be started by
Abuse is an excellent source of information on the many artificial means if the pregnancy continues past 42
756 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
htribdlihC
weeks gestation. The average length of labor is about 14
hours for a first pregnancy and about eight hours in sub-
sequent pregnancies. However,many women experience
a much longer or shorter labor.
Labor can be described in terms of a series of phases.
First stage of labor
During the first phase of labor, the cervix dilates
(opens) from 0–10 cm. This phase has an early,or latent,
phase and an active phase. During the latent phase,
progress is usually very slow. It may take quite a while
and many contractions before the cervix dilates the first
few centimeters. Contractions increase in strength as
labor progresses. Most women are relatively comfortable
during the latent phase and walking around is encour-
aged,since it naturally stimulates the process.
As labor begins, the muscular wall of the uterus
begins to descend, women begin to feel the urge to
begins to contract as the cervix relaxes and expands. As a
“push” or bear down. Active pushing by the mother
portion of the amniotic sac surrounding the baby is pushed
should not begin until the second phase,since pushing
into the opening, it bursts under the pressure, releasing
too early can cause the cervix to swell or to tear and
amniotic fluid. This is called “breaking the bag of waters.”
bleed. The attending healthcare practitioner should coun-
During a contraction,the infant experiences intense
sel the mother on when to begin to push.
pressure that pushes it against the cervix,eventually forc-
ing the cervix to stretch open. At the same time,the con-
Second stage of labor
tractions cause the cervix to thin. During this first stage,a
woman’s contractions occur more and more often and last As the mother enters the second stage of labor,her
longer and longer. The doctor or nurse will do a periodic baby’s head appears at the top of the cervix. Uterine con-
pelvic examto determine how the mother is progressing. tractions get stronger. The infant passes down the vagina,
If the contractions aren’t forceful enough to open the helped along by contractions of the abdominal muscles
cervix,a drug may be given to make the uterus contract. and the mother’s pushing. Active pushing by the mother
is very important during this phase of labor. If an epidur-
As pain and discomfort increase, women may be
al anesthetic is being used, many practitioners recom-
tempted to request pain medication. If possible,though,
mend decreasing the amount administered during this
administration of pain medication or anesthetics should
phase of labor so that the mother has better control over
be delayed until the active phase of labor begins—at
her abdominal muscles.
which point the medication will not act to slow down or
stop the labor. When the top of the baby’s head appears at the open-
ing of the vagina,the birth is nearing completion. First
The active stage of labor is faster and more efficient
the head passes under the pubic bone. It fills the lower
than the latent phase. In this phase, contractions are
vagina and stretches the perineum (the tissues between
longer and more regular,usually occurring about every
the vagina and the rectum). This position is called
two minutes. These stronger contractions are also more
“crowning,”since only the crown of the head is visible.
painful. Women who use the breathing exercises learned
When the entire head is out, the shoulders follow. The
in childbirth classes find that these can help cope with
attending practitioner suctions the baby’s mouth and
the pain experienced during this phase. Many women
nose to ease the baby’s first breath. The rest of the baby
also receive some pain medication at this point—either a
usually slips out easily,and the umbilical cord is cut.
short-term medication,such as Nubain or Numorphan,or
an epidural anesthesia.
Episiotomy
As the cervix dilates to 8–9 cm,the phase called the
transition begins. This refers to the transition from the As the baby’s head appears, the perineum may
first phase (during which the cervix dilates from 0–10 stretch so tight that the baby’s progress is slowed down. If
cm) and the second phase (during which the baby is there is risk of tearing the mother’s skin,the doctor may
pushed out through the birth canal). As the baby’s head choose to make a small incision into the perineum to
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 757
Childbirth
Placenta
Umbilical cord
Uterus
Vagina
Cervix
Stage 1: Dilation of the cervix
Stage 1:Dilation of the cervix.(Illustration by Hans & Cassady.)
complete breech (in which the baby’s legs are crossed
under and in front of the body) and footling breech (in
which one leg or both legs are positioned to enter the birth
canal) are not considered safe to attempt vaginal delivery.
Even in complete breech, other factors should be
met before considering a vaginal birth. An ultrasound
examination should be done to be sure the baby does not
have an unusually large head and that the head is tilted
forward (flexed) rather than back (hyperextended). Fetal
monitoring and close observation of the progress of labor
are also important. A slowing of labor or any indication
of difficulty in the body passing through the pelvis
should be an indication that it is safer to consider a
cesarean section.
Forceps delivery
enlarge the vaginal opening. This is called an episiotomy. If the labor is not progressing as it should or if the
If the woman has not had an epidural or pudendal block, baby appears to be in distress,the doctor may opt for a
she will get a local anesthetic to numb the area. Once the forceps delivery. A forceps is a spoon-shaped device that
episiotomy is made,the baby is born with a few pushes. resembles a set of salad tongs. It is placed around the
baby’s head so the doctor can pull the baby gently out of
the vagina.
Third stage
Forceps can be used after the cervix is fully dilated,
In the final stage of labor,the placenta is pushed out
and they might be required if:
of the vagina by the continuing uterine contractions. The
placenta is pancake shaped and about 10 inches in diam- •the umbilical cord has dropped down in front of the
eter. It has been attached to the wall of the uterus and has baby into the birth canal
served to convey nourishment from the mother to the •the baby is too large to pass through the birth canal
fetus throughout the pregnancy. Continuing uterine con- unaided
tractions cause it to separate from the uterus at this point.
•the baby shows signs of stress
It is important that all of the placenta be removed from
the uterus. If it is not,the uterine bleeding that is normal •the mother is too exhausted to push
after delivery may be much heavier. Before placing the forceps around the baby’s head,
pain medication or anesthesia may be given to the moth-
Breech presentation er. The doctor may use a catheter to empty the mother’s
bladder, and may clean the perineal area with soapy
Approximately 4% of babies are in what is called
water. Often an episiotomy is done before a forceps birth,
the “breech”position when labor begins. In breech pre-
although tears can still occur.
sentation,the baby’s head is not the part pressing against
The obstetrician slides half of the forceps at a time
the cervix. Instead the baby’s bottom or legs are posi-
into the vagina and around the side of the baby’s head to
tioned to enter the birth canal instead of the head. An
gently grasp the head. When both “tongs”are in place,the
obstetrician may attempt to turn the baby to a head down
doctor pulls on the forceps to help the baby through the
position using a technique called version. This is only
birth canal as the uterus contracts. Sometimes the baby
successful approximately half the time.
can be delivered this way after the very next contraction.
The risks of vaginal delivery with breech presentation
The frequency of forceps delivery varies from one
are much higher than with a head-first presentation and the
hospital to the next,depending on the experience of staff
mother and attending practitioner will need to weigh the
and the types of anesthesia offered at the hospital. Some
risks and make a decision on whether to deliver via a
obstetricians accept the need for a forceps delivery as a
cesarean sectionor attempt a vaginal birth. The extent of
way to avoid cesarean birth. However,other obstetrical
the risk depends to a great extent on the type of breech pre-
services don’t use forceps at all.
sentation—of which there are three. Frank breech (the
baby’s legs are folded up against its body) is the most com- Complications from forceps deliveries can occur.
mon and the safest for vaginal delivery. The other types are Sometimes they may cause nerve damage or temporary
758 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
htribdlihC
Stage 2: Expulsion of the fetus
Stage 2:Expulsion of the fetus.(Illustration by Hans & Cassady.)
bruisesto the baby’s face. When used by an experienced
physician,forceps can save the life of a baby in distress.
Vacuum-assisted birth
This method of helping a baby out of the birth canal
was developed as a gentler alternative to forceps. Vacu-
um-assisted birth can only be used after the cervix is
fully dilated (expanded), and the head of the fetus has
begun to descend through the pelvis. In this procedure,
the doctor uses a device called a vacuum extractor,plac-
ing a large rubber or plastic cup against the baby’s head.
A pump creates suction that gently pulls on the cup to
ease the baby down the birth canal. The force of the suc-
tion may cause a bruise on the baby’s head,but it fades
away in a day or so.
Causes and symptoms
The vacuum extractor is not as likely as forceps to
One of the first signs of approaching childbirth may
injure the mother,and it leaves more room for the baby
be a “bloody show,”the appearance of a small amount of
to pass through the pelvis. However,there may be prob-
blood-tinged mucus released from the cervix as it begins
lems in maintaining the suction during the vacuum-
to dilate. This is called the “mucus plug.”
assisted birth,so forceps may be a better choice if it is
important to remove the baby quickly. The most common sign of the onset of labor is con-
tractions. Sometimes women have trouble telling the dif-
ference between true and false labor pains.
Cesarean sections
True labor pains:
A cesarean section,also called a c-section,is a surgi-
•develop a regular pattern, with contractions coming
cal procedure in which incisions are made through a
closer together
woman’s abdomen and uterus to deliver her baby.
•last from 15–30 seconds at the onset and get progres-
Cesarean sections are performed whenever abnor-
sively stronger and longer (up to 60 seconds)
mal conditions complicate labor and vaginal delivery,
threatening the life or health of the mother or the baby. •may get stronger with physical activity
The procedure is performed in the United States on near-
•occur high up on the abdomen,radiating throughout the
ly one of every four babies delivered—more than
abdomen and lower back
900,000 babies each year. The procedure is used in cases
where the mother has had a previous c-section and the Another sign that labor is beginning is the breaking
area of the incision has been weakened. Dystocia,or dif- of the “bag of waters,”the amniotic sac which had cush-
ficult labor,is the another common reason for perform- ioned the baby during the pregnancy. When it breaks,it
ing a c-section. releases water in a trickle or a gush. Only about 10% of
women actually experience this water flow in the begin-
Difficult labor is commonly caused by one of the
ning of labor, however. Most of the time, the rupture
three following conditions:abnormalities in the mother’s
occurs sometime later in labor. If the amniotic sac doesn’t
birth canal; abnormalities in the position of the fetus;
rupture on its own,the doctor will break it during labor.
abnormalities in the labor,including weak or infrequent
contractions. Some women have diarrhea or nausea as labor
begins. Others notice a sudden surge of energy and the
Another major factor is fetal distress, a condition
urge to clean or arrange things right before labor begins;
where the fetus is not getting enough oxygen. Fetal brain
this is known as “nesting.”
damage can result from oxygen deprivation. Fetal dis-
tress is often related to abnormalities in the position of
the fetus, or abnormalities in the birth canal, causing Diagnosis
reduced blood flow through the placenta.
The onset of labor can be determined by measuring
Other conditions also can make c-section advisable, how much the cervix has dilated. The degree of dilation
such as vaginal herpes,hypertension(high blood pres- is estimated by feeling the opening cervix during a pelvic
sure) and diabetes in the mother. exam. Dilation is measured in centimeters,from zero to
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 759
Childbirth
Placenta
being
detached
Umbilical
cord
Stage 3: Expulsion of the placenta
Stage 3:Expulsion of the placenta.(Illustration by Hans &
Cassady.)
because it renders the mother immobile and requires
KEY TERMS interpretation.
Internal monitoring does not use ultrasound,is more
Amniotic sac—The membranous sac that sur- accurate than electronic monitoring and provides continu-
rounds the embryo and fills with watery fluid as ous monitoring for the high risk mother. This requires the
pregnancy advances. mother’s water to be broken and that she be two to three
Breech birth—Birth of a baby bottom-first, instead centimeters dilated. It is used in high-risk situations only.
of the usual head first delivery. This can add to Telemetry monitoring is the newest type of monitor-
labor and delivery problems because the baby’s ing. It uses radio waves transmitted from an instrument
bottom doesn’t mold a passage through the birth on the mother’s thigh. The mother is able to remain
canal as well as does the head. mobile. It provides continuous monitoring and is used in
Cervix—A small cylindrical organ about an inch high-risk situations.
or so long and less than an inch around that makes
up the lower part and neck of the uterus. The Treatment
cervix separates the body and cavity of the uterus
Most women choose some type of pain relief during
from the vagina.
childbirth,ranging from relaxation and imagery to drugs.
Embryo—The unborn child during the first eight
The specific choice may depend on what’s available,the
weeks of its development following conception.
woman’s preferences, her doctor’s recommendations,
Gestation—The period from conception to birth, and how the labor is proceeding. All drugs have some
during which the developing fetus is carried in the risks and some advantages.
uterus.
Regional anesthetics
Perineum—The area between the thighs that lies
behind the genital organs and in front of the anus. Regional anesthetics include epidurals and spinals.
Placenta—The organ that develops in the uterus In this technique,medication is injected into the space
during pregnancy and that links the blood supplies around the spinal nerves. Depending on the type of med-
of mother and baby. ications used,this type of anesthesia can block nerve sig-
nals,causing temporary pain relief,or a loss of sensation
from the waist down. An epidural or spinal block can
provide complete pain relief during cesarean birth.
10. Contractions that cause the cervix to dilate are the An epidural is placed with the woman lying on her
sign of true labor. side or sitting up in bed with the back rounded to allow
more space between the vertebrae. Her back is scrubbed
Fetal monitoring with antiseptic,and a local anesthetic is injected in the
skin to numb the site. The needle is inserted between two
Fetal monitoring is a process in which the baby’s
vertebrae and through the tough tissue in front of the
heart rate is monitored for indicators of stress during labor
spinal column. A catheter is put in place that allows con-
and birth. There are several types of fetal monitoring.
tinuous doses of anesthetic to be given.
A special stethoscope called a fetoscope may be
This type of anesthesia provides complete pain
used. This is a simple and non-invasive method.
relief,and can help conserve a woman’s energy,since she
The Doppler method uses ultrasound; it involves a can relax or even sleep during labor. This type of anes-
handheld listening device that transmits the sounds of the thesia does require an IV and fetal monitor. It may be
heart rate through a speaker or into an attached ear piece. harder for a woman to bear down when it comes time to
It can usually pick up the heart sounds 12 weeks after push,although the amount of anesthesia can be adjusted
conception. This method offers intermittent monitoring. as this stage nears.
It allows the mother freedom to move about and is also
Spinal anesthesia operates on the same principle as
useful during contractions.
epidural anesthesia,and is used primarily in cases of c-
Electronic fetal monitoring uses ultrasound and section delivery. It is administered in the same way as an
provides a view of the heartbeat in relationship to the epidural,but the catheter is not left in place. The amount
mother’s contractions. It can be used either continuously of anesthetic injected is large,since it must be injected at
or intermittently. It is often used in high risk pregnan- one time. Because of the anesthetic’s effect on motor
cies, and is not often recommended for low risk ones nerves,most women using it cannot push during delivery.
760 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
htribdlihC
This is a disadvantage in labor,but not an issue during a c- Johnson,Robert V. Mayo Clinic Complete Book of Pregnancy
section. Spinals provide quick and strong anesthesia and & Baby’s First Year.New York:William Morrow and Co.,
allow for major abdominal surgery with almost no pain. Inc.,1994.
Ryan,Kenneth J.,Ross S. Berkowitz,and Robert L. Barbieri.
Kistner’s Gynecology.6th ed. St. Louis:Mosby,1995. Narcotics
Tuteur,Amy B. How Your Baby is Born.Emeryville,CA:Ziff-
Short-acting narcotics can ease pain and don’t inter- Davis Press,1994.
fere with a woman’s ability to push. However, they can
ORGANIZATIONS
cause sedation,dizziness,nausea,and vomiting. Narcotics American Academy of Husband-Coached Childbirth. P.O. Box
cross the placenta and may slow down a baby’s breathing; 5224,Sherman Oaks,CA 91413. (800) 423-2397; in Cali-
they can’t be given too close to the time of delivery. fornia (800) 422-4784.
American Society for Prophylaxis in Obstetrics/LAMAZE
(ASP.O. /LAMAZE). 1840 Wilson Blvd.,Ste. 204,
Natural childbirth and preparation for childbirth
Arlington,VA 22201. (800) 368-4404.
There are several methods to prepare for childbirth. Childbirth Education Foundation. P.O. Box 5,Richboro,PA
The one selected often depends on what is available 18954. (215) 357-2792.
through the healthcare provider. Overall,family involve- International Association of Parents and Professionals for Safe
ment is receiving increased attention by the healthcare Alternatives in Childbirth. Rte. 1,Box 646,Marble Hill,
MO 63764. (314) 238-2010.
systems, and many hospitals now offer birthing rooms
International Childbirth Education Association. P.O. Box
and maternity centers to help the entire family. There are
20048,Minneapolis,MN 55420. (612) 854-8660.
several choices available for childbirth preparation.
Postpartum Support International. 927 North Kellogg Ave.,
Lamaze,or Lamaze-Pavlov,is the most common in Santa Barbara,CA 93111. (805) 967-7636.
the United States today. It was the first popular natural
childbirth method, becoming popular in the 1960s. Carol A. Turkington
Breathing exercises and concentration on a focal point
are practiced to allow mothers to control pain while Childhood disintegrative disorder see
maintaining consciousness. This allows the flow of oxy- Pervasive developmental disorders
gen to the baby and to the muscles in the uterus to be
maintained. A partner coaches the mother throughout the
birthing process.
The Read method,named for Dick Read,is a tech-
nique of breathing that was originated in the 1930s to Children’s health
help mothers deal with apprehension and tension associ-
Definition
ated with childbirth. This natural childbirth method uses
different breathing for the different stages of childbirth. Children’s health encompasses the physical,mental,
The LeBoyer method stresses a relaxed delivery in a emotional,and social well-being of children from infan-
quiet,dim room. It attempts to avoid overstimulation of cy through adolescence.
the baby and to foster mother-child bonding by placing
the baby on the mother’s abdomen and having the mother Description
massage him or her immediately after the birth. Then the
All children should have regular well-child check
father washes the baby in a warm bath.
ups according to the schedule recommended by their
The Bradley method is called father-coached child- physician or pediatrician. The American Academy of
birth,because it focuses on the father serving as coach Pediatrics (AAP) advises that children be seen for well-
throughout the process. It encourages normal activities baby check ups at two weeks,two months,four months,
during the first stages of labor. six months,nine months,twelve months,fifteen months,
and eighteen months. Well-child visits are recommended
at ages two,three,four,five,six,eight,ten,and annually
Resources
thereafter through age 21.
BOOKS
In addition,an immunization schedule should be fol-
Carlson,Karen J.,Stephanie A. Eisenstat,and Terra Ziporyn.
lowed to protect against disease and infection. As of
The Harvard Guide to Women’s Health.Cambridge,MA:
2001,the AAP and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
Harvard University Press,1996.
Cunningham,F. Gary,et.al. Williams Obstetrics.20th ed. (CDC) recommended that the following childhood
Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997. immunizations be administered by age two:
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 761
Children’s
health
KEY TERMS
Bipolar disorder—Manic depressive disorder. A one or more academic skill sets (e.g., reading, writ-
mood disorder characterized by manic highs and ing, mathematics).
depressive lows.
Motor skills—Controlled movement of muscle
Child development—The process of physical, intel- groups. Fine motor skills involve tasks that require
lectual, emotional, and social growth that occurs dexterity of small muscles, such as buttoning a shirt.
from infancy through adolescence. Erik Erikson, Tasks such as walking or throwing a ball involve the
Margaret Mahler, Sigmund Freud, and Jean Piaget use of gross motor skills.
are among the most well-known child development Obsessive-compulsive disorder—Also known as
theorists. OCD; a disorder characterized by obsessive
thoughts (e.g., fear of contamination) and compul-
CPR—Cardiopulmonary resuscitation. A first aid
sive behaviors (e.g., repetitive hand washing) that
technique designed to stimulate breathing and
cause distress and/or functional impairment.
blood flow through a combination of chest com-
pressions and rescue breathing. Psychological tests—Written, verbal, or visual tasks
that assess psychological functioning, intelligence,
Immunization—Creating immunity to a disease
and/or personality traits.
through a vaccine injection that stimulates the pro-
Type 1 diabetes—A chronic immune system disor-
duction of antibodies.
der in which the pancreas does not produce suffi-
Learning disabilities—An impairment of the cogni- cient amounts of insulin, a hormone that enables
tive processes of understanding and using spoken cells to use glucose for energy. Also called juvenile
and written language that results in difficulties with diabetes, it must be treated with insulin injections.
•Hepatitis B. Three doses. may be suffering from mental illness. Mental health
problems that may afflict children include:
•Diphtheria,Tetanus,and Pertussis (DTaP). Four doses.
•Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
•H. influenzae type b (Hib). Four doses.
According to the AAP,4–12% of school-aged children
•Inactivated Polio. Three doses. have ADHD,a condition characterized by poor impulse
control and excessive motor activity.
•Pneumococcal Conjugate. Three doses.
•Learning disorders. Learning disabilities affect one in
•Measles,Mumps,Rubella(MMR). One dose.
10 school children.
•Varicella (chickenpox). One dose.
•Depression,anxiety,and bipolar disorder. Affective,
•Hepatitis A. (In certain geographical areas and with or mood,disorders can affect kids as well as adults.
certain high risk groups.)
•Eating disorders. Anorexia nervosa,bulimia nervosa,
Some immunizations may cause mild side effects,or and binge eating disorder (BED) frequently occur in
more rarely,serious adverse reactions. However,the ben- adolescent girls.
efits of immunization greatly outweigh the incidence of
•Schizophrenia. A disorder characterized by bizarre
health problems arising from them.
thoughts and behaviors, paranoia,impaired sense of
There are serious chronic diseases and health prob- reality,and psychosismay be diagnosed in childhood.
lems that are frequently diagnosed in childhood and can-
•Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Also called OCD,this
not be vaccinated against. These include,but are not lim-
anxiety disorder afflicts one in 200 children.
ited to, asthma, type I diabetes (juvenile diabetes),
•Autismand pervasive developmental disorder. Severe
leukemia,hemophilia,and cystic fibrosis.
developmental disabilities that cause a child to become
withdrawn and unresponsive.
Mental health
•Mental retardation. Children under age 18 with an IQ
Children who have difficulty in areas of language of 70 or below and impairments in adaptive functioning
acquisition,cognitive development,and behavior control are considered mentally retarded.
762 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
htlaeh
s’nerdlihC
Emotional and social health •Peer pressure. Although it can have a positive impact,
peer pressure is often a source of significant stress for
Children take their first significant steps toward
children. This is particularly true in adolescence when
socialization and peer interaction when they begin to
“fitting in”seems all-important.
engage in cooperative play at around age four. Their
social development will progress throughout childhood •Drugs and alcohol. Curiosity is intrinsic to childhood,
and adolescence as they develop friendships,start to be and over 30% of children have experimented with alco-
influenced by their peers,and begin to show interest in hol by age 13. Open communication with children that
the opposite sex. sets forth parental expectations about drug and alcohol
use is essential.
Factors which can have a negative impact on the
emotional and social well-being of children include: •Negative sexual experiences. Sexual abuseand assault
can emotionally scar a child and instill negative feel-
•Violence. Bullying can cause serious damage to a
ings about sexuality and relationships.
child’s sense of self-esteem and personal safety,as can
experiences with school violence.
•Family turmoil. Divorce,death,and other life-chang- Causes and symptoms
ing events that alter the family dynamic can have a seri-
Childhood health problems may be congenital (i.e.,
ous impact on a child. Even a positive event such as the
present at birth) or acquired through infection,immune
birth of a sibling or a move to a new city and school can
system deficiency,or another disease process. They may
put emotional strain on a child.
also be caused by physical trauma (e.g.,a car accident or
•Stress. The pressure to perform well academically and a playground fall) or a toxic substance (e.g.,an allergen,
in extracurricular activities such as sports can be over- drug,or poisonous chemical),or triggered by genetic or
whelming to some children. environmental factors.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 763
Children’s
health
DR. BENJAMIN SPOCK (1903–1998)
toward the raising of infants and children. He began med-
ical school at Yale University in 1925, and transferred to
Columbia University’s College of Physicians and Sur-
geons in 1927. Spock had decided well before starting his
medical studies that he would “work with children, who
have their whole lives ahead of them” and so, upon tak-
ing his M.D. degree in 1929 and serving his general
internship at the prestigious Presbyterian Hospital, he
specialized in pediatrics at a small hospital crowded with
children in New York’s Hell’s Kitchen area.
On a summer vacation in 1943 he began to write his
most famous book and he continued to work on it from
1944 to 1946 while serving as a medical officer in the
Navy. The book sharply broke with the authoritarian tone
and rigorous instructions found in earlier generations of
baby-care books, most of which said to feed infants on a
strict schedule and not to pick them up when they cried.
Spock, who spent ten years trying to reconcile his psycho-
analytic training with what mothers were telling him about
their children, told his readers “You know more than you
think you do. Don’t be afraid to trust your own common
(Library of Congress.)
sense. Take it easy, trust your own instincts, and follow the
directions that your doctor gives you.” The response was
Benjamin Spock, pediatrician and political activist, overwhelming. Baby and Child Care rapidly became
was most noted for his authorship of Baby and Child America’s all-time best-seller except for Shakespeare and
Care, which significantly changed predominant attitudes the Bible; by 1976 it had also eclipsed Shakespeare.
Physical and mental health problems in childhood achievement of certain milestones in these areas. A
can cause a wide spectrum of symptoms. However,the developmental milestone is a task or skill set that a child
following behaviors frequently signify a larger emotion- is expected to reach at a certain age or stage of life. For
al,social,or mental disturbance: example, by age one, most children have achieved the
physical milestone of walking with the assistance of an
•signs of alcohol and drug use
adult. Developmental disorders may be identified and/or
•falling grades
diagnosed by physicians,teachers,child psychologists,
•lack of interest in activities that were previously enjoy- therapists,counselors,and other professionals who inter-
able to the child act with children on a regular basis.
•excessive anxiety It is important to remember that all children are
unique,and develop at different paces within this broad
•persistent,prolonged depression
framework. Reaching a milestone early or late does not
•withdrawal from friends and family
necessarily indicate a developmental problem. However,
•violence if a child is consistently lagging on achieving milestones,
or has a significant deficit in one developmental area,he
•temper tantrums or inappropriate displays of anger
or she may be experiencing developmental delays.
•self-inflicted injury
Pediatricians and other medical professionals typi-
•bizarre behavior and/or speech
cally diagnose physical illness and disease in children. In
•trouble with the police cases of illness and injury,children will undergo a thor-
•sexual promiscuity ough physical examination and patient history. Diag-
nostic tests may be performed as appropriate. In cases of
•suicide attempts
mental or emotional disorders, a psychologist or other
The causes of developmental disorders and delays mental healthcare professional will meet with the patient
and learning disabilities are not always fully understood. to conduct an interview and take a detailed social and
Pervasive developmental disorder (PDD) and autistic medical history. Interviews with a parent or guardian
spectrum disorder (more commonly known as autism) may also be part of the diagnostic process. The physician
are characterized by unresponsiveness and severe impair- may also administer one or more psychological tests
ments in one or more of the following areas: (also called clinical inventories,scales,or assessments).
•Social interaction. Autistic children are often unaware
of acceptable social behavior and are withdrawn and
Treatment
socially isolated. They frequently do not like physical
contact. Medications may be prescribed to treat certain child-
hood illnesses. Proper dosage is particularly important
•Communication and language. A child with autism or
with infants and children,as medications such as aceta-
PDD may not speak or may display limited or imma-
minophen can be toxic in excessive amounts. Parents
ture language skills.
and caregivers should always follow the instructions for
•Behavior. Autistic or PDD children may have difficulty
use that accompany medications,and inform the child’s
dealing with anger,can be self-injurious,and may dis-
pediatrician if the child is taking any other drugs or vita-
play obsessive behavior.
mins to prevent potentially negative drug interactions.
Autism is associated with brain abnormalities,but Any side effects or adverse reactions to medication
the exact mechanisms that trigger the disorder are yet to should be reported to the child’s physician. If antibiotics
be determined. It has been linked to certain congenital are prescribed,the full course should always be taken.
conditions such as neurofibromatosis, fragile X syn-
Other treatments for childhood illness and/or injuries
drome,and phenylketonuria(PKU).
include,but are not limited to,nutritional therapy,physical
therapy,respiratory therapy,medical devices (e.g.,hear-
Diagnosis ing aids,glasses,braces),and in some cases,surgery.
Physical,intellectual,emotional,and social matura- Counseling is typically a front-line treatment for
tion are all important markers of a child’s overall health psychological disorders. Therapy approaches include
and well-being. When evaluating children,pediatricians psychotherapy, cognitive therapy, behavioral therapy,
and child-care specialists assess related skill sets,such as family counseling,and group therapy. Therapy or coun-
a child’s acquisition and use of language,fine and gross seling may be administered by social workers, nurses,
motor skills, cognitive growth, and socialization, and licensed counselors and therapists,psychologists,or psy-
764 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
htlaeh
s’nerdlihC
chiatrists. Psychoactive medication may also be pre- of the symptoms associated with pervasive developmen-
scribed for symptom relief in children and adolescents tal disorder (PDD),autism spectrum disorder,and mental
with mental disorders. retardation. Mental illnesses such as schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder are also chronic, lifelong disorders,
Support groups may also provide emotional support
although their symptoms can often be well-controlled
for children with chronic illnesses or mental disorders.
with medication.
This approach,which allows individuals to seek advice
and counsel from others in similar circumstances,can be
extremely effective, especially in older children who Prevention
look towards their peers for guidance and support.
Parents can take some precautions to ensure the
Speech therapy may be helpful to children with safety of their children. Childproofing the home,follow-
developmental delays in language acquisition. Children ing a recommended immunization schedule,educating
with learning disorders can benefit from special educa- kids on safety,learning CPR,and taking kids for regular
tion therapy. well-child check-ups can help to protect against physical
harm. In addition, encouraging open communication
with children can help them grow both emotionally and
Alternative treatment
socially. Providing a loving and supportive home envi-
Therapeutic approaches that encourage self-discov- ronment can help to nurture an emotionally healthy child
ery and empowerment may be useful in treating some who is independent, self-confident, socially skilled,
childhood emotional traumas and mental disorders. Art insightful,and empathetic towards others.
therapy,the use of the creative process to express and
Because they are still developing motor skills,kids
understand emotion, encompasses a broad range of
can be particularly accident prone. Observe the following
humanistic disciplines, including visual arts, dance,
safety rules to protect children from injury:
drama,music,film,writing,literature,and other artistic
genres. It can be particularly effective in children who •Helmets and padding. Children should always wear a
may have difficulty gaining insight to emotions and properly fitted helmet and appropriate protective gear
thoughts they are otherwise incapable of expressing. when riding a bike, scooter, or similar equipment or
participating in sports. They should also ride on desig-
Certain mild herbal remedies may also be safely
nated bike paths whenever possible,and learn bicycle
used with children,such as ginger (Zingiber officinale)
safety rules (i.e.,ride with traffic,use hand signals).
tea for nausea and aloe vera salve for burns. Parents and
•Playground safety. Swing sets and other outdoor play
caregivers should always consult their healthcare
equipment should be well-maintained have at least 12
provider before administering herbs to children.
in (30 cm) of loose fill materials (e.g., sand, wood
chips) underneath to cushion falls,and children should
Prognosis always be properly supervised at play.
The prognosis for childhood health problems varies •Stay apprised of recalls. Children’s toys, play equip-
widely. In general,early detection and proper treatment ment, and care products are frequently involved in
can greatly improve the odds of recovery from many product recalls. The U.S. Consumer Safety Products
childhood ailments. Commission (CSPC) is the agency responsible for
tracking these recalls (see Resourcesbelow).
Some learning disabilities and mild developmental
disorders can be overcome or greatly improved through •Stay safe in the car. Up to 85% of children’s car seats
the therapies discussed above. However,as of early 2001, are improperly installed and/or used. Infants should
there was no known medical treatment or pharmacologi- always be in a rear-facing car seat until they are over 12
cal therapy that is capable of completely eliminating all months of age and weigh more than 20 lb (9 kg). Never
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 765
Children’s
health
Leading Causes Of Illness/Injury In Adolescents
Trauma (this could be anything from sports-related injuries to gunshot wounds; alcohol or other drug abuse is frequently a factor)
Mental health issues (substance abuse, depression, etc.)
Sexually transmitted infections
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Eating disorders
put an infant or car seat in a front passenger seat that •Post the phone numbers of poison control and the pedi-
has an air bag. Once they outgrow their forward facing atrician near the phone,and teach children about dial-
car seats,children between the ages of four and eight ing 9-1-1 for emergencies.
who weigh between 40–80 lb (18–36 kg) should ride in
•Children under age five should never be left alone in the
a booster seat. Every child who rides in a car over this
bathtub, wading pool, or near any standing water
age and weight should buckle up with a properly fitted
source (including an open toilet). Drowning is the lead-
lap and shoulder belt.
ing cause of death by injury for children between the
•Teach children pedestrian safety. Younger children ages of one and four.
should never be allowed to cross the street by them-
•Remove lead paint. Lead is a serious health hazard for
selves, and older kids should know to follow traffic
children,and houses built before 1978 should be tested
signs and signals,cross the street at the corner,and look
for lead paint. If lead is found, the paint should be
both ways before stepping off the curb.
removed using the appropriate safety precautions.
•Teach children about personal safety. Kids should know
These safety guidelines are not all-inclusive, and
what to do in case they get lost or are approached by a
there are many age-specific safety precautions that par-
stranger. It is also imperative that parents talk openly
ents and guardians of children should observe. For exam-
with their children about their body and sexuality,and
ple,infants should never be left with a propped-up bottle
what behavior is inappropriate,to protect them against
in their mouths or given small play items because of the
sexual predators.
chokinghazards involved.
Child-proofing the household is also an important
step towards keeping kids healthy. To make a house a
Resources
safe home:
BOOKS
•Ban guns. Accidental shootings in the home injure an
Holtzman,Debra Smiley. The Panic Proof Parent.Chicago:
estimated 1,500 children under age 14 each year. If a
NTC/Contemporary,2000.
gun must be in the home,it should be securely locked
Pasquariello Jr.,Patrick S. ed. The Children’s Hospital of
in a tamper proof box or safe.
Philadelphia:Book of Pregnancy and Child Care.New
•Keep all matches, lighters, and flammable materials York:John Wiley & Sons,Inc.,1999.
White,Linda,and Sunny Mavor. Kids,Herbs,and Health.
properly stored and out of the reach of children.
Loveland,CO:Interweave Press,1998.
•Make sure hot water heaters are set to 120 degrees or
below to prevent scalding injuries. ORGANIZATIONS
National Institute of Mental Health. 6001 Executive Boulevard,
•Equip the home with working fire extinguishers and
Rm. 8184,MSC 9663,Bethesda,MD 20892-9663. (301)
smoke alarms,and teach children what to do in case of
443-4513.
fire.
National SAFE KIDS Campaign. Children’s National Medical
Center. (202) 662-0600. <http://www.safekids.org>.
•Secure all medications (including vitamins,herbs,and
U.S. Consumer Products Safety Commission (CPSC). 4330
supplements), hazardous chemicals, and poisonous
East-West Highway,Bethesda,MD 20814-4408. (800)
substances (including alcohol and tobacco).
638-2772. <http://www.cpsc.gov>.
•Don’t smoke. Aside from causing cancer and other
health problems in smokers,second-hand smoke is haz- Paula Ford-Martin
ardous to a child’s health.
Chinese traditional herbal medicine see
•Keep small children away from poisonous plants out-
doors,and remove any indoor plants that are toxic. Traditional Chinese herbalism
766 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
htlaeh
s’nerdlihC
Leading Causes Of Death In Adolescents
Motor vehicle crashes
Suicide (numbers 2 and 3 are approximately equal)
Homicide
Poisoning (which includes accidental poisonings due to alcohol or other drug overdose)
Drowning
Chinese traditional medicine see Traditional manipulation is an excellent option for acute lower back
pain, and may also relieve neck pain as well as other
Chinese medicine
musculoskeletal pain. Although most back pain will sub-
side eventually with no treatment at all, chiropractic
treatment can significantly shorten the time it takes to get
relief. Some types of headachecan also be successfully
treated by chiropractic.
Chiropractic
Definition Description
Chiropractic is from Greek words meaning done by Origins
hand. It is grounded in the principle that the body can
Spinal manipulation has a long history in many cul-
heal itself when the skeletal system is correctly aligned
tures but Daniel D. Palmer is the founder of modern chi-
and the nervous system is functioning properly. To
ropractic theory,dating back to the 1890s. A grocer and
achieve this,the practitioner uses his or her hands or an
magnetic healer,he applied his knowledge of the nervous
adjusting tool to perform specific manipulations of the
system and manual therapies in an unusual situation. One
vertebrae. When these bones of the spine are not correct-
renowned story concerns Harvey Lillard,a janitor in the
ly articulated,resulting in a condition known as subluxa-
office where Palmer worked. The man had been deaf for
tion, the theory is that nerve transmission is disrupted
17 years, ever since he had sustained an injury to his
and causes pain and illness manifested in the back as
upper spine. Palmer performed an adjustment on a painful
well as other areas of the body.
vertebra in the region of the injury and Lillard’s hearing
Chiropractic is one of the most popular alternative was reputedly restored. Palmer theorized that all commu-
therapies currently available. Some would say it now nication from the brain to the rest of the body passes
qualifies as mainstream treatment as opposed to comple- through the spinal canal,and areas that are poorly aligned
mentary medicine. Chiropractic treatment is covered by or under stresscan cause physical symptoms both in the
many insurance plans. It has become well-accepted treat- spine and in other areas of the body. Thus the body has
ment for acute pain and problems of the spine,including the innate intelligence to heal itself when unencumbered
lower back pain and whiplash. Applications beyond that by spinal irregularities causing nerve interference. After
scope are not supported by current evidence, although his success with Lillard,other patients began coming to
there are ongoing studies into the usefulness of chiroprac- him for care, and responded well to adjustments. This
tic for such problems as ear infections,dysmenorrhea, resulted in Palmer’s further study of the relationship
infant colic,migraine headaches,and other conditions. between an optimally functional spine and normal health.
Palmer founded the first chiropractic college in
Purpose 1897. His son,B. J. Palmer,continued to develop chiro-
practic philosophy and practice after his father’s death.
Most people will experience back pain at some time
B. J. and other faculty members were divided over the
in their lives. Injuries due to overexertion and poor pos-
role of subluxation in disease. B. J. saw it as the cause of
ture are among the most common. Depending on the
all disease. The others disagreed and sought a more ratio-
cause and severity of the condition,options for treatment
nal way of thinking,thus broadening the base of chiro-
may include physical therapy,rest,medications,surgery,
practic education. From 1910–1920,many other chiro-
or chiropractic care. Chiropractic treatment carries none
practic colleges were established. Other innovators,
of the risks of surgical or pharmacologic treatment. Prac-
including John Howard, Carl Cleveland, Earl Home-
titioners use a holistic approach to health, which is
wood,Joseph Janse,Herbert Lee,and Claude Watkins,
appreciated by most patients. The goal is not merely to
also helped to advance the profession.
relieve the present ailment,but to analyze the cause and
recommend appropriate changes of lifestyle to prevent The theories of the Palmers receive somewhat
the problem from recurring again. They believe in a broader interpretation today. Many chiropractors believe
risk/benefit analysis before use of any intervention. The that back pain can be relieved and health restored
odds of an adverse outcome are extremely low. Chiro- through chiropractic treatment even in patients who do
practic has proven in several studies to be less expensive not have demonstrable subluxations. Scientific develop-
than many more traditional routes such as outpatient ment and research of chiropractic is gaining momentum.
physical therapy. Relief from some neuromuscular prob- The twenty-first century will likely see the metaphysical
lems is immediate,although a series of treatments is like- concepts such as innate intelligence give way to more
ly to be required to maintain the improvement. Spinal scientific proofs and reform.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 767
Chiropractic
medical care received, and any medications currently
being taken. Further, the current complaint should be
described in terms of how long it has been a problem,
how it has progressed,and whether it is the result of an
injury or occurred spontaneously. Details of how an
injury occurred should be given. The physical exam
should evaluate by observation and palpation whether the
painful area has evidence of inflammation or poor align-
ment. Range of motion may also be assessed. In the spine,
either hypomobility (fixation) or hypermobility may be a
problem. Laboratory analysis is helpful in some cases to
rule out serious infection or other health issues that may
require referral for another type of treatment. Many prac-
titioners also insist on x rays during the initial evaluation
Manipulation
When spinal manipulation is employed,it is generally
done with the hands,although some practitioners may use
an adjusting tool. A classic adjustment involves a high
velocity, low amplitude thrust that produces a usually
painless popping noise,and improves the range of motion
of the joint that was treated. The patient may lie on a spe-
cially designed,padded table that helps the practitioner to
achieve the proper positions for treatment. Some adjust-
ments involve manipulating the entire spine,or large por-
tions of it,as a unit; others are small movements designed
to affect a single joint. Stretching, traction, and slow
manipulation are other techniques that can be employed to
restore structural integrity and relieve nerve interference.
Length of treatment
The number of chiropractic treatments required will
vary depending on several factors. Generally longer-term
treatment is needed for conditions that are chronic,
severe,or occur in conjunction with another health prob-
lem. Patients who are not in overall good health may also
Many people besides the Palmers have contributed have longer healing times. Some injuries will inherently
to the development of chiropractic theory and technique. require more treatments than others in order to get relief.
Some have gone on to create a variety of procedures and Care is given in three stages. Initially appointments are
related types of therapy that have their roots in chiroprac- more frequent with the goal of relieving immediate pain.
tic, including McTimoney-Corley chiropractic, cran- Next,the patient moves into a rehabilitative stage to con-
iosacral manipulation,naprapathy,and applied kinesiol- tinue the healing process and help to prevent a relapse.
ogy. Osteopathy is another related holistic discipline Finally,the patient may elect periodic maintenance,or
that utilizes spinal and musculoskeletal manipulation as a wellness treatments,along with lifestyle changes if need-
part of treatment,but osteopathic training is more similar ed in order to stay in good health.
in scope to that of an M.D.
Follow-up care
Initial visit
Discharge and follow-up therapy are important. If an
An initial chiropractic exam will most often include a injury occurred as a result of poor fitness or health,a pro-
history and a physical. The patient should be asked about gram of exercise or nutrition should be prescribed.
what the current complaint is,whether there are chronic Home therapy may also be recommended, involving
health problems,family history of disease,dietary habits, such things as anti-inflammatory medication and appli-
768 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
citcarporihC
An example of a McTimoney chiropractic technique on
patient’s lumbar vertebra.The McTimoney chiropractic is a
system of adjustment by hand of displacements of the
spinal column and bones.It can also be applied to animals.
(Photograph by Francoise Sauze, Custom Medical Stock Photo.
Reproduced by permission.)
cations of heat or ice packs. Conscious attention to pos-
ture may help some patients avoid sustaining a similar DANIEL PALMER (1845–1913)
injury in the future,and the chiropractor should be able
to discern what poor postural habits require correction. A Chiropractic inventor, Daniel David Palmer, was
sedentary lifestyle,particularly with a lot of time spent born on March 7, 1845, in Toronto, Ontario. He was
sitting, is likely to contribute to poor posture and may one of five siblings, the children of a shoemaker and his
predispose a person to back pain and injury. wife, Thomas and Katherine Palmer. Daniel Palmer and
his older brother fell victim to wanderlust and left Cana-
da with a tiny cash reserve in April 1865. They immi-
Types of practitioners
grated to the United States on foot, walking for 30 days
Some practitioners use spinal manipulation to the before arriving in Buffalo, New York. They traveled by
exclusion of all other modalities, and are known as boat through the St. Lawrence Seaway to Detroit, Michi-
straight chiropractors. Others integrate various types of gan. There they survived by working odd jobs and sleep-
ing on the dock. Daniel Palmer settled in What Cheer,
therapy such as massage, nutritional intervention, or
Iowa, where he supported himself and his first wife as a
treatment with vitamins, herbs, or homeopathic reme-
grocer and fish peddler in the early 1880s. He later
dies. They also embrace ideas from other health care tra-
moved to Davenport, Iowa, where he raised three
ditions. This group is known as mixers. The vast majority
daughters and one son.
of chiropractors,perhaps 85%,fall in this latter category.
Palmer was a man of high curiosity. He investigated
a variety of disciplines of medical science during his
Preparations lifetime, many of which were in their infancy. He was
intrigued by phrenology and assorted spiritual cults, and
Patients should enter the chiropractic clinic with an for nine years he investigated the relationship between
open mind. This will help to achieve maximum results. magnetism and disease. Palmer felt that there was one
thing that caused disease. He was intent upon discover-
ing this one thing, or as he called it: the great secret.
Precautions
In September 1895, Palmer purported to have cured
Chiropractic is not an appropriate therapy for dis- a deaf man by placing pressure on the man’s displaced
eases that are severely degenerative and may require vertebra. Shortly afterward Palmer claimed to cure
medication or surgery. Many conditions of the spine are another patient of heart trouble, again by adjusting a dis-
amenable to manipulative treatment, but that does not placed vertebra. The double coincidence led Palmer to
include fractures. The practitioner should be informed theorize that human disease might be the result of dislo-
cated or luxated bones, as Palmer called them. That
in advance if the patient is on anticoagulants, or has
same year he established the Palmer School of Chiro-
osteoporosisor any other condition that may weaken the
practic where he taught a three-month course in the sim-
bones. There are other circumstances that would con-
ple fundamentals of medicine and spinal adjustment.
traindicate chiropractic care,and these should be detect-
Palmer, who was married six times during his life,
ed in the history or physical exam. In addition to frac-
died in California in 1913; he was destitute. His son,
tures, Down syndrome, some congenital defects, and
Bartlett Joshua Palmer, successfully commercialized the
some types of cancer are a few of the things that may
practice of chiropractic.
preclude spinal manipulation. On rare occasions,a frac-
ture or dislocation may occur. There is also a very slim
possibility of experiencing a strokeas a result of spinal
manipulation, but estimates are that it is no more fre-
a chiropractic treatment. Some patients may also experi-
quent than 2.5 occurrences per one million treatments.
ence mild headache or fatiguethat resolves quickly.
Be wary of chiropractors who insist on costly x rays
and repeated visits with no end in sight. Extensive use is
Research and general acceptance
not scientifically justifiable,especially in most cases of
lower back pain. There are some circumstances when x As recently as the 1970s, the American Medical
rays are indicated, including acute or possibly severe Association (a national group of medical doctors) was
injuries such as those that might result from a car accident. quite hostile to chiropractic, which it deemed a cult.
AMA members were advised that it was unethical to be
associated with chiropractors. Fortunately that has
Side effects
changed,and as of 2000,many allopathic or traditionally
It is not uncommon to have local discomfort in the trained physicians enjoy cordial referral relationships
form of aches,pains,or spasms for a few days following with chiropractors. The public is certainly strongly in
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 769
Chiropractic
processes. This can offer significant relief from earaches.
KEY TERMS Some headaches also fall in this category,as skilled use
of soft tissue techniques and adjustment may relieve the
Adjustment—A very specific type of manipulation muscle tension that may initiate some headaches.
of the spine designed to return it to proper struc- Dysmenorrhea,hyperactivity,indigestion,and infer-
tural and functional form. tility are said to be relieved as a result of improved flow
Allopathic—Conventional practice of medicine of blood and nerve energy following treatment. Evidence
generally associated with M.D. physicians. for this is anecdotal at best,but manipulation is unlikely
to be harmful if causes treatable by other modalities have
Dysmenorrhea—Painful menstruation.
been ruled out.
Osteoporosis—A condition of decreased bone
For conditions such as cancer,fractures,infectious
density, causing increased bone fragility, that is
diseases,neurologic disease processes,and anything that
most common in elderly women.
may cause increased orthopedic fragility, chiropractic
Subluxation—Misalignment between vertebrae treatment alone is not an effective therapy,and may even
that structurally and functionally impairs nerve be harmful in some cases. Those who have known circu-
function. latory problems,especially with a history of thrombosis,
should not have spinal manipulation.
Resources
favor of chiropractic treatment. An estimated 15% of
people in the United States used chiropractic care in BOOKS
1997. Chiropractors see the lion’s share of all patients Cassileth,Barrie. The Alternative Medicine Handbook.New
who seek medical help for back problems. York:W. W. Norton & Co.,Inc.,1998.
Dillard,James,and Terra Ziporyn. Alternative Medicine for
Research has also supported the use of spinal manip-
Dummies.Indianapolis:IDG Bks. Worldwide,1998.
ulation for acute low back pain. There is some anecdotal Leach,Robert. The Chiropractic Theories:Principles and
evidence recommending chiropractic treatment for ail- Clinical Applications.3rd ed. Philadelphia:Lippincott
ments unrelated to musculoskeletal problems,but there is Williams & Wilkins,1994.
not enough research-based data to support this. On the Rondberg,Terry. Chiropractic First.Chandler,AZ:The Chiro-
other hand,a chiropractor may be able to treat problems practic Journal,1996.
and diseases unrelated to the skeletal structure by Woodham,Anne,and David Peters. Encyclopedia of Healing
Therapies.New York:DK Publishing,Inc.,1997.
employing therapies other than spinal manipulation.
Although many chiropractors limit their practice to ORGANIZATIONS
spine and joint problems,others claim to treat disorders American Chiropractic Association. 1701 Clarendon Blvd.,
Arlington,VA 22209. (800)986-4636. <http://www.
that are not closely related to the back or musculoskeletal
amerchiro.org/>.
system. These include asthma,bed-wetting,bronchitis,
coughs, dizziness, dysmenorrhea, earache, fainting,
Judith Turner
headache, hyperactivity, indigestion, infertility,
migraine,pneumonia,and issues related to pregnancy.
Chlamydial infections see Chlamydial
There are at least three explanations for possible efficacy
pneumonia; Epididymitis;
for these conditions. One is that the problem could be
linked to a nerve impingement,as may be possible with Nongonococcal urethritis; Sexually
bed-wetting,dizziness,fainting,and headache. In a sec- transmitted diseases
ond group,chiropractic treatment may offer some relief
from complicating pain and spasms caused by the dis-
ease process, as with asthma, bronchitis, coughs, and
pneumonia. The discomforts of pregnancy may also be
relieved with gentle chiropractic therapy. A third possi-
Chlamydial pneumonia
bility is that manipulation or use of soft-tissue techniques
may directly promote improvement of some conditions.
Definition
One particular procedure,known as the endonasal tech-
nique,is thought to help the eustachian tube to open and Chlamydial pneumonia refers to one of several
thus improve drainage of the middle ear. The tube is types of pneumonia that can be caused by various types
sometimes blocked off due to exudates or inflammatory of the bacteria known as Chlamydia.
770 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ainomuenp
laidymalhC
Description
Pneumonia is an infection of the lungs. The air sacs
(alveoli) and/or the tissues of the lungs become swollen,
and the alveoli may fill with pus or fluid. This prevents the
lungs from taking in sufficient oxygen,which deprives the
blood and the rest of the body’s tissues of oxygen.
There are three major types of Chlamydia:Chlamy-
dia psittaci,Chlamydia pneumoniae,and Chlamydia tra-
chomatis. Each of these has the potential to cause a type
of pneumonia.
Causes and symptoms
Chlamydia trachomatisis a major cause of sexually
transmitted diseases(called nongonococcal urethritis
and pelvic inflammatory disease). When a woman with
an active chlamydial infection gives birth to a baby,the
baby may aspirate (suck into his or her lungs) some of
the mother’s bacteria-laden secretions while passing
through the birth canal. This can cause a form of relative-
ly mild pneumonia in the newborn,occurring about two
to six weeks after delivery.
Chlamydia psittaci is a bacteria carried by many
types of birds,including pigeons,canaries,parakeets,par-
culprit. A mild pneumonia in an otherwise healthy per-
rots,and some gulls. Humans acquire the bacteria through
son is likely to be a community-acquired walking pneu-
contact with dust from bird feathers,bird droppings,or
monia,such as that caused by Chlamydia pneumoniae.
from the bite of a bird carrying the bacteria. People who
keep birds as pets or who work where birds are kept have
the highest risk for this type of pneumonia. This pneumo- Treatment
nia,called psittacosis,causes fever,cough,and the pro-
Treatment varies depending on the specific type of
duction of sputum containing pus. This type of pneumo-
Chlamydia causing the infection. A newborn with
nia may be quite severe,and is usually more serious in
Chlamydia trachomatis improves rapidly with ery-
older patients. The illness can last several weeks.
thromycin. Chlamydia psittaciinfection is treated with
Chlamydia pneumoniaeusually causes a type of rel- tetracycline, bed rest, oxygen supplementation, and
atively mild “walking pneumonia.”Patients experience codeine-containing cough preparations. Chlamydia
fever and cough. This type of pneumonia is called a pneumoniaeinfection is treated with erythromycin.
“community-acquired pneumonia” because it is easily
passed from one member of the community to another.
Prognosis
The prognosis is generally excellent for the newborn
Diagnosis
with Chlamydia trachomatis pneumonia. Chlamydia
Laboratory tests indicating the presence of one of psittacimay linger,and severe cases have a deathrate of
the strains of Chlamydia are sophisticated, expensive, as high as 30%. The elderly are hardest hit by this type of
and performed in only a few laboratories across the pneumonia. A young, healthy person with Chlamydia
country. For this reason,doctors diagnose most cases of pneumoniae has an excellent prognosis. In the elderly,
chlamydial pneumonia by performing a physical exami- however,there is a 5–10% death rate from this infection.
nationof the patient,and noting the presence of certain
factors. For instance,if the mother of a baby sick with
Prevention
pneumonia is positive for a sexually transmitted disease
caused by Chlamydia trachomatis,the diagnosis is obvi- Prevention of Chlamydia trachomatis pneumonia
ous. History of exposure to birds in a patient sick with involves recognizing the symptoms of genital infection in
pneumonia suggests that Chlamydia psittacimay be the the mother and treating her prior to delivery of her baby.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 771
Chlamydial
pneumonia
A transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of a sectioned
Chlamydia pneumoniaebacterium.(Photograph by Dr.Kari
Lounatmaa, Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by per-
mission.)
Chloroquine see Antimalarial drugs
KEY TERMS
Chlorzoxazone see Muscle relaxants
Alveoli—The small air sacs clustered at the ends
of the bronchioles in the lungs, in which oxygen-
carbon dioxide exchange takes place.
Aspiration—When solids or liquids that should be
Choking
swallowed into the stomach are instead breathed
into the respiratory system, or when substances
Definition
from the outside environment are accidentally
breathed into the lungs. Choking is the inability to breathe because the tra-
chea is blocked,constricted,or swollen shut.
Sputum—Material produced within the alveoli in
response to an infectious or inflammatory process.
Description
Choking is a medical emergency. When a person is
choking,air cannot reach the lungs. If the airways cannot
Chlamydia psittacican be prevented by warning peo-
be cleared,deathfollows rapidly.
ple who have birds as pets,or who work around birds,to
be careful to avoid contact with the dust and droppings of Anyone can choke,but choking is more common in
these birds. Sick birds can be treated with an antibiotic in children than in adults. Choking is a common cause of
their feed. Because people can contract psittacosis from accidental death in young children who are apt to put toys
each other, a person sick with this infection should be or coins in their mouths,then unintentionally inhale them.
kept in isolation,so as not to infect other people. About 3,000 adults die each year from choking on food.
Chlamydia pneumoniae is difficult to prevent People also choke because infection causes the
because it is spread by respiratory droplets from other throat tissue to swell shut. It is believed that this is what
sick people. Because people with this type of pneumonia caused George Washington’s death. Allergic reactions
do not always feel very sick, they often continue to can also cause the throat to swell shut. Acute allergic
attend school,go to work,and go to other public places. reactions are called anaphylactic reactions and may be
They then spread the bacteria in the tiny droplets that are fatal. Strangulation puts external pressure on the trachea
released into the air during coughing. Therefore, this causing another form of choking.
pneumonia is very difficult to prevent and often occurs in
Finally, people can choke from obstructive sleep
outbreaks within communities.
apnea. This is a condition where tissues of the body
obstruct the airways during sleep. Sleep apnea is most
Resources common in obese men who sleep on their backs. Smok-
ing,heavy alcohol use,lung diseases such as emphyse-
BOOKS
ma,and an inherited tendency toward a narrowed airway
Drew,W. Lawrence. “Chlamydia.”Sherris Medical Microbiol-
ogy:An Introduction to Infectious Diseases.3rd ed. Ed. and throat all increase the risk of choking during sleep.
Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1994.
Stoffman,Phyllis. The Family Guide to Preventing and Treat-
Causes and symptoms
ing 100 Infectious Diseases.New York:John Wiley &
Sons,1995. There are three reasons why people choke. These are:
PERIODICALS •mechanical obstruction
Dalhoff,Klaus,and Matthias Maass. “Chlamydia Pneumoniae
•tissue swelling
Pneumonia in Hospitalized Patients:Clinical Characteris-
tics and Diagnosis.”Chest110,no. 2 (Aug. 1996):351+. •crushing of the trachea
ORGANIZATIONS Regardless of the cause,choking cuts off the air sup-
American Lung Association. 1740 Broadway,New York,NY ply to the lungs. Indications that a person’s airway is
10019. (800) 586-4872. <http://www.lungusa.org>. blocked include:
•the person cannot speak or cry out
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
•the person’s face turns blue from lack of oxygen
Chlorhexidine see Antibiotics, topical •the person desperately grabs at his or her throat
772 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gnikohC
•the person has a weak coughand labored breathing that
produces a high-pitched noise KEY TERMS
•the person has all of the above symptoms,then becomes
unconscious Trachea—The windpipe. A tube extending from
below the voice box into the chest where it splits
•during sleep,the person has episodes of gasping,paus-
into two branches, the bronchi, that go to each
es in breathing,and sudden awakenings.
lung.
Tracheotomy—The surgical creation of an open-
Diagnosis
ing in the trachea that functions as an alternative
Diagnosing choking due to mechanical obstruction airway so that the patient may breathe.
is straightforward,since the symptoms are obvious even
to an untrained person. In choking due to infection,the
person,usually a child,will have a feverand signs of ill-
ness before labored breathing begins. If choking is due to dogs, and grapes can reduce the chance of choking in
an allergic reaction to medication or insect bites,the per- children. Adults should avoid heavy alcohol consump-
son’s earlobes and face will swell,giving an external sign tion when eating and avoid talking and laughing with
that internal swelling is also occurring. food in their mouths. The risk of obstructive sleep apnea
choking can be reduced by avoiding alcohol, tobacco
Choking due to sleep apnea is usually diagnosed on
smoking,tranquilizers,and sedatives before bed.
reports of symptoms by the person’s sleep partner. There
are also alarm devices to detect the occurrence of sleep
apnea. Eventually sleep may be interrupted so frequently Resources
that daytime drowsiness becomes a problem.
BOOKS
Berkow,Robert,Mark Beers,and Andrew Fletcher,eds. “Sleep
Treatment Apnea Syndromes.”In The Merck Manual of Medical
Information. Home Edition.Whitehouse Station,NJ:
Choking, except during sleep apnea, is a medical
Merck Research Laboratories,1997.
emergency. If choking is due to allergic reaction or infec-
tion, people should summon emergency help or go ORGANIZATIONS
immediately to an emergency room. If choking is due to American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
obstructed airways,the Heimlich maneuver(an emer-
gency procedure in which a person is grasped from
Tish Davidson
behind in order to forcefully expel the obstruction)
should be performed immediately. In severe cases a tra-
cheotomy(an incision into the trachea through the neck
below the larynx) must be performed.
Patients who suffer airway obstruction during sleep
Cholangitis
can be treated with a device similar to an oxygen mask
that creates positive airway pressure and delivers a mix-
Definition
ture of oxygen and air.
The term cholangitis means inflammation of the bile
ducts. The term applies to inflammation of any portion of
Prognosis
the bile ducts,which carry bile from the liver to the gall-
Many people are treated successfully for choking bladder and intestine. The inflammation is produced by
with no permanent effects. However, if treatment is bacterial infection or sometimes other causes.
unsuccessful, the person dies from lack of oxygen. In
cases where the ariway is restored after the critical period
Description
passes,there may be permanent brain damage.
Bile,which is needed for digestion,is produced in
the liver and then enters the common bile duct (CBD)
Prevention
through the hepatic ducts. Bile enters the gallbladder
Watching children carefully to keep them from between meals,when the muscle or sphincter that con-
putting foreign objectsin their mouth and avoiding giv- trols flow of bile between the CBD and intestine is
ing young children food like raisins,round slices of hot closed. During this period,bile accumulates in the CBD;
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 773
Cholangitis
the pressure in the CBD rises,as would a pipe closed off than one type of bacteria is involved. Patients with AIDS
at one end. The increase in pressure eventually causes the can develop infection of narrowed bile ducts with unusual
bile to flow into the gallbladder. During meals,the gall- organisms such as Cryptosporidiumand others.
bladder contracts and the sphincter between the gallblad-
The three symptoms present in about 70% of patients
der and intestine relaxes,permitting bile to flow into the
with cholangitis are abdominal pain,fever,and jaundice.
intestine and take part in digestion.
Some patients only have chills and fever with minimal
Bile that has just been produced by the liver is sterile abdominal symptoms. Jaundice or yellow discoloration of
(free of bacteria). This is partly due to its antibacterial the skin and eyes occurs in about 80% of patients. The
properties; these are produced by the immunoglobulins color change is due to bile pigments that accumulate in the
(antibodies) secreted in bile,the bile acids which inhibit blood and eventually in the skin and eyes.
bacterial growth themselves,and mucus.
Inflammation due to the autoimmune disease prima-
A small number of bacteria may be present in the bile ry sclerosing cholangitis leads to multiple areas of nar-
ducts and gallbladder,getting there by moving backward rowing and eventual infection. Tumors can block the bile
from the intestine,which unlike the bile ducts,contains duct and also cause cholangitis,but as noted,infection is
large numbers of bacteria. The normal flow of bile out of relatively infrequent; in fact cholangitis occurs in only
the ducts and into the intestine also helps keep too many about one in six patients with tumors.
organisms from multiplying. Bacteria also reach the bile
Another type of bile duct infection occurs mainly in
ducts from the lymph tissue or from the blood stream.
Southeast Asia and is known as recurrent pyogenic
When the passage of bile out of the ducts is blocked, cholangitis or Oriental cholangitis. It has also been iden-
the few bacteria that are there rapidly reproduce. A par- tified in Asians immigrating to North America. Most
tial blockage to the flow of bile can occur when a stone patients have stones in the bile ducts and/or gallbladder,
from the gallbladder blocks the duct, and also allows and many cases are associated with the presence of para-
bacteria to flow back into the CBD, and creates ideal sites within the ducts. The role of parasites in causing
conditions for their growth. Tumors,on the other hand, infection is not clear. Many researchers believe that they
cause a more complete blockage of bile flow,both in and are just coincidental, and have nothing to do with the
out,so fewer infections occur. The reproducing organ- stones or infection.
isms are often able to enter the bloodstream and infect
multiple organs such as the liver and heart valves.
Diagnosis
Another source of inflammation of the bile ducts
The above symptoms alone are very suggestive of
occurs in diseases of altered immunity,known as “autoim-
cholangitis; however,it is important to determine the exact
mune diseases.”In these diseases,the body fails to recog-
cause and site of possible obstruction. This is because
nize certain cells as part of its normal composition. The
attacks are likely to recur,and different causes require dif-
body thinks these cells are foreign and produces antibod-
ferent treatments. For example,the treatment of cholangi-
ies to fight them off,just as it fights against bacteria and
tis due to a stone in the CBD is different from that due to
viruses. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a typical exam-
bile duct strictures. An elevated white blood countsug-
ple of an autoimmune disease involving the bile ducts.
gests infection, but may be normal in 20% of patients.
Abnormal or elevated tests of liver function,such as biliru-
Causes and symptoms bin and others are also frequently present. The specific
bacteria is sometimes identified from blood cultures.
As noted above,the two things that are needed for
cholangitis to occur are:1) obstruction to bile flow,and
X-ray techniques
2) presence of bacteria within the bile ducts. The most
common cause of cholangitis is infection of the bile A number of x-ray techniques can make the diagno-
ducts due to blockage by a gallstone. Strictures (portions sis of bile duct obstruction; these include ultrasound and
of ducts that have become narrow) also function in the computed tomography scans (CT scans). However,
same way. Strictures may be due to congenital (birth) ultrasound often cannot tell if an obstruction is due to a
abnormalities of the bile ducts,form as a result of injury stricture or stone,missing a stone in about half the cases.
to the bile duct (such as surgery,trauma),or result from CT scans have an even poorer record of stone detection.
inflammation that leads to scar tissue and narrowing.
Another method of diagnosing and sometimes treat-
The bacterium most commonly associated with infec- ing the cause of bile duct obstruction or narrowing is
tion of the bile ducts is Escherichia coli (E. coli)which is a called percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography. In
normal inhabitant of the intestine. In some cases, more this procedure,dye is injected into the ducts by means of
774 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitignalohC
KEY TERMS
Antibiotic—A medication that is designed to kill or Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy (ESWL)—This
weaken bacteria. is a technique that uses high-pressure waves similar
to sound waves that can be “focused” on a very small
Bilirubin—A pigment produced by the liver that is
area, thereby fracturing small solid objects such as
excreted in bile which causes a yellow discol-
gallstones, kidney stones, etc. The small fragments
oration of the skin and eyes when it accumulates in
can pass more easily and harmlessly into the intes-
those organs. Bilirubin levels can be measured by
tine or can be dissolved with medications.
blood tests, and are most often elevated in patients
with liver disease or a blockage to bile flow.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis—A chronic disease
Computed tomography scan (CT scan)—A special- in which it is believed that the immune system fails
ized x-ray procedure in which cross-sections of the to recognize the cells that compose the bile ducts as
area in question can be examined in detail. In eval- part of the same body, and attempts to destroy
uating the bile ducts, iodine-based dye is often them. It is not clear what exactly causes the disease,
injected intravenously. The procedure is of greatest but it is frequently associated with another inflam-
value in diagnosing the complications of gallstones matory disease of the digestive tract, ulcerative coli-
(such as abscesses, pancreatitis) rather than docu- tis. The inflammation of the ducts eventually pro-
menting the presence of a stone. duces formation of scar tissue, causing multiple
areas of narrowing (strictures) that block bile flow
Endoscope—An endoscope as used in the field of
and lead to bacterial infection. Liver transplant
gastroenterology is a thin flexible tube which uses a
gives the best chance for long-term survival.
lens or miniature camera to view various areas of
the gastrointestinal tract. When the procedure is
Ultrasound—A non-invasive procedure based on
performed to examine certain organs such as the
changes in sound waves of a frequency that cannot
bile ducts or pancreas, the organs are not viewed
be heard, but respond to changes in tissue composi-
directly, but rather indirectly through the injection
tion. It requires no preparation and no radiation
of x-ray dye into the bile duct.
occurs. It has become the “gold standard” for diag-
Endoscopy—The performance of an exam using an nosis of stones in the gallbladder, but is less accurate
endoscope is referred by the general term in diagnosing stones in the bile ducts. Gallstones as
endoscopy. Diagnosis through biopsies or other small as 2 mm can be identified. The procedure can
means and therapeutic procedures can be done now also be done through an endoscope, greatly
with these instruments. improving investigation of the bile ducts.
a needle placed into the liver. It is also used to drain bile infection does not come under control promptly,as noted
and relieve an obstruction. by decrease in fever and pain, then other methods to
relieve the obstruction and infection will be needed.
ENDOSCOPIC TECHNIQUES. An endoscope is a thin
Either way,definitive treatment of the cause of bile duct
flexible tube that uses a lens or mirror to look at various
infection is the next step,and this has undergone revolu-
parts of the gastrointestinal tract. Endoscopic retro-
tionary changes in the past decade. Endoscopic, radi-
grade cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) can accu-
ographic and other techniques have made it possible to
rately determine the cause and site of blockage. It also
successfully remove stones and dilate strictures that pre-
has the advantage of being able to treat the cause of
viously required surgical intervention, often with high
obstruction,by removing stones and dilating (stretching)
morbidity and mortality.
strictures. ERCP involves the injection of x-ray dye into
the bile ducts through an endoscope. Endoscopic ultra-
sound is another endoscopic alternative, but is not as Radiologic and endoscopic techniques
available as ERCP and is not therapeutic.
Just as with diagnosis, treatment of cholangitis
involves a number of similar procedures that differ main-
Treatment
ly in the way the bile ducts are entered. The aims of these
The first aim is to control the bacterial infection. techniques are immediate relief of obstruction and infec-
Broad-spectrum antibiotics are usually used. If the tion as well as correction of any abnormalities that have
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 775
Cholangitis
caused them. It is important to realize that even with development of the techniques described above. For those
endoscopy,x-ray dye is injected into the ducts and there- patients whose episode of infection is caused by some-
fore the radiologist plays a role in both types of proce- thing other than a simple stone,the future is not as bright,
dures. When endoscopy is used,the muscle between the but still often responsive to treatment. Some patients with
intestine and bile duct is widened, to allow stones to autoimmune disease will need liver transplantation.
pass. This is called a sphincterotomy and is often enough
to relieve any obstruction and help clear infection. The
Prevention
widening of the muscle is needed if other procedures
involving the bile duct are going to be performed. This involves eliminating those factors that increase
the risk of infection of the bile ducts,mainly stones and
The above techniques can be summarized as follows:
strictures. If it is medically possible,patients who have
•Insertion of a catheter or thin flexible tube to drain bile their gallbladder and suffer a bout of cholangitis should
and relieve obstruction. When performed by insertion undergo surgical removal of the gallbladder and removal
of a needle into the liver the technique is called percuta- of any stones.
neous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD); when per-
For other patients,a variety of therapies as outlined
formed endoscopically the catheter exits through the
above,including dissolving small stones with bile acids,
nose and is called a nasobiliary drain.
are also available. A combination of several of these
•Balloons can be inserted into the ducts with either methods is needed in some patients. Patients should dis-
method to dilate strictures. cuss the risks and alternatives of these treatments with
•Insertion of a prosthesis which is a rigid or flexible tube their physicians.
designed to keep a narrowed area open; it is usually
placed after a stricture is dilated with a balloon. Resources
•Removal of stones can be accomplished most often by BOOKS
endoscopic techniques. A number of methods have Bilhartz,Lyman E.,and Jay D. Horton. “Gallstone Disease and
been developed to perform this including laser and con- Its Complications.”In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastroin-
tact lithotripsy in which stones are fragmented by testinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feldman,et al.
high-energy waves. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
Greenberger,Norton J.,and Kurt J. Isselbacher. “Diseases of
the Bile Ducts.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Med-
Surgical treatment
icine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-
Fortunately,with recent advances in the above meth- Hill,1997.
ods,this is a last option. Nonetheless,about 5–10% of Mulvihill,Sean J. “Surgery for Choledocholithiasis.”In
Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Dis-
patients will need to undergo surgical exploration of the
ease,ed. Mark Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saun-
bile ducts.
ders Company. 1997.
In some instances,the bile duct is so narrowed due to Ostroff,James W.,and Jeanne M. LaBerge. “Endoscopic and
prior inflammation or tumor,that it needs connection to a Radiologic Treatment of Biliary Disease.”In Sleisenger &
different area of the intestinal tract to drain. This is rather Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark
complicated surgery and carries a mortality rate of 2%. Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Company.
1997.
Paumgartner,Gustav. “Nonsurgical Management of Gallstone
Other treatment
Disease.”In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and
Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy (ESWL) was Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W.
first used to break up kidney stones. The technique has B. Saunders Company. 1997.
been extended to the treatment of gallstones,in both the
PERIODICALS
gallbladder and bile ducts. It is often combined with Cotton,Peter B.,and Robert H. Hawes. “Therapeutic Biliary
endoscopic procedures to ease the passage of fragmented Endoscopy.”Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Clinics of North
stones, or oral medications that can dissolve the frag- America(Jan. 1996):1-263.
ments. Rarely,stones are also dissolved by instilling vari- Lee,Young-Mee,and Marshall M. Kaplan. “Primary Scleros-
ous chemicals such as ether directly into the bile ducts. ing Cholangitis.”New England Journal of Medicine332,
no. 14 (1995):924.
Prognosis OTHER
“Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).”
The outlook for those with cholangitis has markedly American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy.<http://
improved in the last several years due in large part to the www.asge.org>.
776 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitignalohC
“Gallstones.”National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Disease.<http://www.niddk.nih.gov>.
Kaminstein,David S. “Gallstones.”A Healthy Me Page.
<http://www.ahealthyme.com/topic/cholangitis>.
“Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis.”National Institute of Dia-
betes and Digestive and Kidney Disease.<http://www.
niddk.nih.gov>.
Worman,Howard J. “Sclerosing Cholangitis.”Columbia Uni-
versity Health Sciences Page.<http://cpmcnet.columbia.
edu/dept/gi/PSC.html>.
“Your Digestive System and How It Works.”National Institute
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease.<http://
www.niddk.nih.gov>.
David Kaminstein,MD
Cholecystectomy
abdomen, which allows visualization of the internal
organs and projection of this image onto a video monitor.
Definition
Three smaller incisions allow for insertion of other instru-
A cholecystectomy is the surgical removal of the ments to perform the surgical procedure. A laser may be
gallbladder. The two basic types of this procedure are used for the incision and cautery (burning unwanted tis-
open cholecystectomy and the laparoscopic approach. It sue to stop bleeding),in which case the procedure may be
is estimated that the laparoscopic procedure is currently called laser laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
used for approximately 80% of cases.
In a conventional or open cholecystectomy,the gall-
bladder is removed through a surgical incision high in the
Purpose
right abdomen,just beneath the ribs. A drain may be insert-
A cholecystectomy is performed to treat cholelithia- ed to prevent accumulation of fluid at the surgical site.
sis and cholecystitis. In cholelithiasis, gallstones of
varying shapes and sizes form from the solid components Preparation
of bile. The presence of stones,often referred to as gall-
As with any surgical procedure,the patient will be
bladder disease,may produce symptoms of excruciating
required to sign a consent form after the procedure is
right upper abdominal painradiating to the right shoul-
explained thoroughly. Food and fluids will be prohibited
der. The gallbladder may become the site of acute infec-
after midnight before the procedure. Enemas may be
tion and inflammation,resulting in symptoms of upper
ordered to clean out the bowel. If nausea or vomiting are
right abdominal pain,nausea and vomiting. This condi-
present, a suction tube to empty the stomach may be
tion is referred to as cholecystitis. The surgical removal
used,and for laparoscopic procedures,a urinary drainage
of the gallbladder can provide relief of these symptoms.
catheter will also be used to decrease the risk of acciden-
tal puncture of the stomach or bladder with insertion of
Precautions
the trocar (a sharp-pointed instrument).
Although the laparoscopic procedure requires general
anesthesia for about the same length of time as the open Aftercare
procedure,laparoscopygenerally produces less postoper-
Post-operative care for the patient who has had an open
ative pain,and a shorter recovery period. The laparoscopic
cholecystectomy, as with those who have had any major
procedure would not be preferred in cases where the gall-
surgery,involves monitoring of blood pressure,pulse,respi-
bladder is so inflamed that it could rupture,or when adhe-
ration and temperature. Breathing tends to be shallow
sions (additional fibrous bands of tissue) are present.
because of the effect of anesthesia,and the patient’s reluc-
tance to breathe deeply due to the pain caused by the prox-
Description
imity of the incision to the muscles used for respiration. The
The laparoscopic cholecystectomy involves the inser- patient is shown how to support the operative site when
tion of a long narrow cylindrical tube with a camera on breathing deeply and coughing,and given pain medication
the end,through an approximately 1 cm incision in the as necessary. Fluid intake and output is measured,and the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 777
Cholecystectomy
A surgeon performs a laparoscopic cholecystectomy on a
patient.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permis-
sion.)
PERIODICALS
KEY TERMS Wilson,R. G.,et al. “Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy as a Safe
and Effective Treatment for Severe Acute Cholecystitis.”
British Medical Journal(15 Aug. 1992):394-6.
Cholecystitis—Infection and inflammation of the
gallbladder, causing severe pain and rigidity in the OTHER
upper right abdomen. “Gallstones and Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy.”Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.<http://www.cdc.gov/
Cholelithiasis—Also known as gallstones, these
nccdphp/ddt/ddthome.htm>.
hard masses are formed in the gallbladder or pas-
Mayo Clinic Online.5 Mar. 1998 <http://www.mayohealth.org>.
sages, and can cause severe upper right abdomi-
“Patient Information Documents on Digestive Diseases.”
nal pain radiating to the right shoulder, as a result
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
of blocked bile flow. Disease.<http://www.niddk.nih.gov>.
Gallbladder—A hollow pear-shaped sac on the
under surface of the right lobe of the liver. Bile Kathleen D. Wright,RN
comes to it from the liver, and passes from it to the
intestine to aid in digestion.
Cholecystitis
operative site is observed for color and amount of wound
drainage. Fluids are given intravenously for 24–48 hours, Definition
until the patient’s diet is gradually advanced as bowel activi-
Cholecystitis refers to a painful inflammation of the
ty resumes. The patient is generally encouraged to walk 8
gallbladder’s wall. The disorder can occur a single time
hours after surgery and is discharged from the hospital with-
(acute),or can recur multiple times (chronic).
in three to five days,with return to work approximately four
to six weeks after the procedure.
Care received immediately after laparoscopic cholecys- Description
tectomy is similar to that of any patient undergoing surgery
The gallbladder is a small,pear-shaped organ in the
with general anesthesia. A unique post-operative pain may
upper right hand corner of the abdomen. It is connected
be experienced in the right shoulder related to pressure from
by a series of ducts (tube-like channels) to the liver,pan-
carbon dioxide used through the laparoscopic tubes. This
creas,and duodenum (first part of the small intestine). To
pain may be relieved by laying on the left side with right
aid in digestion, the liver produces a substance called
knee and thigh drawn up to the chest. Walking will also help
bile,which is passed into the gallbladder. The gallblad-
increase the body’s reabsorption of the gas. The patient is
der concentrates this bile,meaning that it reabsorbs some
usually discharged the day after surgery, and allowed to
of the fluid from the bile to make it more potent. After a
shower on the second postoperative day. The patient is
meal, bile is squeezed out of the gallbladder by strong
advised to gradually resume normal activities over a three
muscular contractions,and passes through a duct into the
day period,while avoiding heavy lifting for about 10 days.
duodenum. Due to the chemical makeup of bile,the con-
tents of the duodenum are kept at an optimal pH level for
Risks
digestion. The bile also plays an important part in allow-
Potential problems associated with open cholecys- ing fats within the small intestine to be absorbed.
tectomy include respiratory problems related to location
of the incision,wound infection,or abscessformation.
Causes and symptoms
Possible complications of laparoscopic cholecystectomy
include accidental puncture of the bowel or bladder and In about 95% of all cases of cholecystitis,the gall-
uncontrolled bleeding. Incomplete reabsorption of the bladder contains gallstones. Gallstones are solid accu-
carbon dioxide gas could irritate the muscles used in res- mulations of the components of bile,particularly choles-
piration and cause respiratory distress. terol, bile pigments, and calcium. These solids may
occur when the components of bile are not in the correct
Resources proportion to each other. If the bile becomes overly con-
centrated, or if too much of one component is present,
BOOKS
stones may form. When these stones block the duct leav-
Monahan,Frances,and Marianne Neighbors. Medical Surgical
Nursing:Foundations in Clinical Practice.Philadelphia: ing the gallbladder,bile accumulates within the gallblad-
W. B. Saunders Co.,1998. der. The gallbladder continues to contract, but the bile
778 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sititsycelohC
cannot pass out of the gallbladder in the normal way.
Back pressure on the gallbladder,chemical changes from
the stagnating bile trapped within the gallbladder, and
occasionally bacterial infection,result in damage to the
gallbladder wall. As the gallbladder becomes swollen,
some areas of the wall do not receive adequate blood
flow,and lack of oxygen causes cells to die.
When the stone blocks the flow of bile from the liver,
certain normal byproducts of the liver’s processing of red
blood cells (called bilirubin) build up. The bilirubin is
reabsorbed into the bloodstream,and over time this biliru-
bin is deposited in the skin and in the whites of the eyes.
Because bilirubin contains a yellowish color,it causes a
yellowish cast to the skin and eyes that is called jaundice.
Gallstone formation is seen in twice as many women
as men,particularly those between the ages of 20 and 60.
Pregnant women,or those on birth control pills or estro-
Murphy’s sign. Physical examinationmay also reveal an
gen replacement therapy have a greater risk of gallstones,
increased heart rate and an increased rate of breathing.
as do Native Americans and Mexican Americans. People
who are overweight, or who lose a large amount of Blood tests will show an increase in the white blood
weight quickly are also at greater risk for developing
count,as well as an increase in bilirubin. Ultrasound is
used to look for gallstones and to measure the thickness
gallstones. Not all individuals with gallstones will go on
of the gallbladder wall (a marker of inflammation and
to have cholecystitis,since many people never have any
scarring). A scan of the liver and gallbladder,with careful
symptoms from their gallstones and never know they
attention to the system of ducts throughout (called the bil-
exist. However,the vast majority of people with chole-
iary tree) is also used to demonstrate obstruction of ducts.
cystitis will be found to have gallstones. Rare causes of
cholecystitis include severe burnsor injury,massive sys- Rare complications of cholecystitis include:
temic infection,severe illness,diabetes,obstruction by a
•massive infection of the gallbladder,in which the gall-
tumor of the duct leaving the gallbladder, and certain
bladder becomes filled with pus (called empyema)
uncommon infections of the gallbladder (including bac-
teria and worms). •perforation of the gallbladder,in which the build-up of
material within the gallbladder becomes so great that
Although there are rare reports of patients with
the wall of the organ bursts,with a resulting abdominal
chronic cholecystitis who never experience any pain,
infection called peritonitis
nearly 100% of the time cholecystitis will be diagnosed
after a patient has experienced a bout of severe pain in •formation of abnormal connections between the gall-
the region of the gallbladder and liver. The pain may be bladder and other organs (the duodenum,large intes-
crampy and episodic,or it may be constant. The pain is tine,stomach),called fistulas
often described as pushing through to the right upper
•obstruction of the intestine by a very large gallstone
back and shoulder. Because deep breathing increases the
(called gallstone ileus)
pain,breathing becomes shallow. Feveris often present,
and nausea and vomitingare nearly universal. Jaundice •emphysema of the gallbladder,in which certain bacte-
occurs when the duct leaving the liver is also obstructed, ria that produce gas infect the gallbladder,resulting in
although it may take a number of days for it to become stretching of the gallbladder and disruption of its wall
apparent. When bacterial infection sets in, the patient by gas
may begin to experience higher fever and shaking chills.
Treatment
Diagnosis
Initial treatment of cholecystitis usually requires
Diagnosis of cholecystitis involves a careful abdomi- hospitalization. The patient is given fluids,salts,and sug-
nal examination. The enlarged,tender gallbladder may be ars through a needle placed in a vein (intravenous or IV).
felt through the abdominal wall. Pressure in the upper No food or drink is given by mouth, and often a tube,
right corner of the abdomen may cause the patient to stop called a nasogastric or NG tube,will need to be passed
breathing in, due to an increase in pain. This is called through the nose and down into the stomach to drain out
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 779
Cholecystitis
A close-up view of an inflamed gallbladder.(Custom Medical
Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
laser) can be used to destroy the gallstones. The laparo-
KEY TERMS scopic procedure can also be used to remove the gallblad-
der through one of the small incisions. Because of the
Bile—A substance produced by the liver, and con- smaller incisions,laparoscopic cholecystectomy is a pro-
centrated and stored in the gallbladder. Bile con- cedure that is less painful and promotes faster healing.
tains many different substances, including bile
salts, cholesterol, and bilirubin. After a meal, the Prognosis
gallbladder pumps bile into the duodenum (the
first part of the small intestine) to keep the intes- Hospital management of cholecystitis ends the symp-
tine’s contents at the appropriate pH for digestion, toms for about 75% of all patients. Of these patients,
and to help break down fats. however,25% will go on to have another attack of chole-
cystitis within a year,and 60% will have another attack
Bilirubin—Produced when red blood cells break
within six years. Each attack of cholecystitis increases a
down. It is a yellowish color and when levels are
patient’s risk of developing life-threatening complica-
abnormally high, it causes the yellowish tint to
tions,requiring risky emergency surgery. Therefore,early
eyes and skin known as jaundice.
removal of the gallbladder,rather than a “wait-and-see”
Cholecystectomy—An operation to remove the approach,is usually recommended. Cure is complete in
gallbladder. those patients who undergo cholecystectomy.
Cholecystotomy—An operation during which the
gallbladder is opened, gallstones are removed,
Prevention
and excess bile is drained. The gallbladder is not
removed. Prevention of cholecystitis is probably best attempt-
ed by maintaining a reasonably ideal weight. Some stud-
Duct—A tube through which various substances
ies have suggested that eating a diet high in fiber,vegeta-
can pass. These substances can travel through
bles,and fruit is also protective.
ducts to another organ or into the bloodstream.
Resources
BOOKS
the excess fluids. If infection is suspected, antibiotics Greenberger,Norton J.,and Kirk J. Isselbacher. “Acute and
are given. Chronic Cholecystitis.”In Harrison’s Principles of Inter-
nal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:
Ultimately,treatment almost always involves removal McGraw-Hill,1997.
of the gallbladder, a surgery called cholecystectomy.
PERIODICALS
While this is not usually recommended while the patient is
Chung,Shing C. “Acute Acalculous Cholecystitis.”Postgradu-
acutely ill,patients with complications usually do require
ate Medicine98,no. 3 (Sept. 1995):199+.
emergency surgery (immediately following diagnosis)
Lewis,R. “Gallbladder:An Organ You Can Live Without.”
because the deathrate increases in these cases. Similarly, FDA Consumer25,no. 4 (1991):13+.
those patients who have cholecystitis with no gallstones Lo,Chung-Mau,et al. “Early Decision for Conversion of
have about a 50% chance of death if the gallbladder is not Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy for Treatment of Acute
quickly removed. Most patients, however, do best if Cholecystitis.”American Journal of Surgery173,no. 6
surgery is performed after they have been stabilized with (June 1997):513+.
fluids, an NG tube, and antibiotics as necessary. When
ORGANIZATIONS
this is possible,gallbladder removal is done within five to
Digestive Disease National Coalition. 507 Capitol Court NE,
six days of diagnosis. In patients who have other serious
Suite 200,Washington,DC 20003. (202) 544-7497.
medical problems that may increase the risks of gallblad- <http://www.ddnc.org>.
der removal surgery,the surgeon may decide to leave the National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse. 2 Infor-
gallbladder in place. In this case, the operation may mation Way,Bethesda,MD 20892-3570. (800) 891-5389.
involve removing obstructing gallstones and draining <http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health/digest/nddic.htm>.
infected bile (called cholecystotomy).
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
Both cholecystectomy and cholecystotomy may be
performed via the classical open abdominal operation
Cholecystography see Gallbladder x rays
(laparotomy). Tiny,“keyhole”incisions,a flexible scope,
and a laser device that shatters the stones (a laparoscopic Choledocholithiasis see Gallstones
780 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sititsycelohC
Cholelithiasis see Gallstones
Cholelithotomy see Gallstone removal
Cholera
Definition
Cholera is an acute illness characterized by watery
diarrhea that is caused by the bacterium Vibrio
cholerae. Cholera is spread by eating food or drinking
water contaminated with the bacteria. Although cholera
was a public health problem in the United States and
Europe a hundred years ago,modern sanitation and the
treatment of drinking water have virtually eliminated the
disease in developed countries. In third world countries,
however,cholera is still common.
ment of the stomach. However,when a person has ingest-
ed food or water containing large amounts of cholera bac-
Description
teria,some will survive to infect the intestines. As would
Cholera is spread by eating food or drinking water be expected,antacid usage or the use of any medication
that has been contaminated with cholera bacteria. Conta- that blocks acid production in the stomach would allow
mination usually occurs when human feces from a per- more bacteria to survive and cause infection.
son who has the disease seeps into a community water
In the small intestine,the rapidly multiplying bacte-
supply. Fruits and vegetables can also be contaminated in
ria produce a toxin that causes a large volume of water
areas where crops are fertilized with human feces.
and electrolytes to be secreted into the bowels and then
Cholera bacteria also live in warm,brackish water and
to be abruptly eliminated as watery diarrhea. Vomiting
can infect persons who eat raw or undercooked seafood
may also occur. Symptoms begin to appear between one
obtained from such waters. Cholera is rarely transmitted
and three days after the contaminated food or water has
directly from one person to another.
been ingested.
Cholera often occurs in outbreaks or epidemics. The
Most cases of cholera are mild,but about one in 20
World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that during
patients experience severe, potentially life-threatening
any cholera epidemic,approximately 0.2–1% of the local
symptoms. In severe cases, fluids can be lost through
population will contract the disease. Anyone can get
diarrhea and vomiting at the rate of one quart per hour.
cholera,but infants,children,and the elderly are more
This can produce a dangerous state of dehydration
likely to die from the disease because they become dehy-
unless the lost fluids and electrolytes are rapidly replaced.
drated faster than adults. There is no particular season in
which cholera is more likely to occur. Signs of dehydration include intense thirst,little or no
urine output, dry skin and mouth, an absence of tears,
Because of an extensive system of sewage and water
glassy or sunken eyes, muscle cramps, weakness, and
treatment in the United States,Canada,Europe,Japan,
rapid heart rate. The soft spot on an infant’s head will
and Australia,cholera is generally not a concern for visi-
appear to be sunken or drawn in. Dehydration occurs most
tors and residents of these countries. People visiting or
rapidly in the very young and the very old because they
living in other parts of the world,particularly on the Indi-
have fewer fluid reserves. A doctor should be consulted
an subcontinent and in parts of Africa and South Ameri-
immediately any time signs of severe dehydration occur.
ca, should be aware of the potential for contracting
Immediate replacement of the lost fluids and electrolytes
cholera and practice prevention. Fortunately,the disease
is necessary to prevent kidney failure,coma,and death.
is both preventable and treatable.
Causes and symptoms Diagnosis
Because V. cholerae bacteria are sensitive to acid, Rapid diagnosis of cholera can be made by examin-
most cholera-causing bacteria die in the acidic environ- ing a fresh stool sample under the microscope for the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 781
Cholera
A false color transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of
Vibrio choleraebacterium magnified 6,000 times its original
size.(Photography by T.McCarthy, Custom Medical Stock
Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
have not come in because it can cause the teeth to
KEY TERMS become permanently discolored.
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the Prognosis
immune system in response to a specific foreign
Today, cholera is a very treatable disease. Patients
protein or particle called an antigen.
with milder cases of cholera usually recover on their own
Electrolytes—Salts and minerals that ionize in
in three to six days without additional complications.
body fluids. Common human electrolytes are sodi-
They may eliminate the bacteria in their feces for up to
um, chloride, potassium, and calcium. Electrolytes
two weeks. Chronic carriers of the disease are rare. With
control the fluid balance of the body and are
prompt fluid and electrolyte replacement,the death rate in
important in muscle contraction, energy genera-
patients with severe cholera is less than 1%. Untreated,
tion, and almost all major biochemical reactions
the death rate can be greater than 50%. The difficulty in
in the body.
treating severe cholera is not in knowing how to treat it,
Toxin—A poison. In the case of cholera, a poison but in getting medical care to ill people in underdeveloped
secreted as a byproduct of the growth of the areas of the world where medical resources are limited.
cholera bacteria in the small intestine.
Prevention
The best form of cholera prevention is to establish
good sanitation and waste treatment systems. In the
presence of V. cholerae bacteria. Cholera can also be
absence of adequate sewage treatment, the following
diagnosed by culturing a stool sample in the laboratory to
guidelines should be followed to reduce the possibility of
isolate the cholera-causing bacteria. In addition,a blood
infection:
test may reveal the presence of antibodies against the
cholera bacteria. In areas where cholera occurs often, •Boil it. Drink and brush teeth only with water that has
however, patients are usually treated for diarrhea and been boiled or treated with chlorine or iodine tablets. Safe
vomiting symptoms as if they had cholera without labo- drinks include coffee and tea made with boiling water or
ratory confirmation. carbonated bottled water and carbonated soft drinks.
•Cook it. Eat only thoroughly cooked foods, and eat
them while they are still hot. Avoid eating food from
Treatment street vendors.
The key to treating cholera lies in preventing dehy- •Peel it. Eat only fruit or nuts with a thick,intact skin or
dration by replacing the fluids and electrolytes lost shell that is removed immediately before eating.
through diarrhea and vomiting. The discovery that rehy-
•Forget it. Do not eat raw foods such as oysters or
dration can be accomplished orally revolutionized the
ceviche. Avoid salads and raw vegetables. Do not use
treatment of cholera and other,similar diseases by mak-
untreated ice cubes in otherwise safe drinks.
ing this simple,cost-effective treatment widely available
•Stay out of it. Do not swim or fish in polluted water.
throughout the world. The World Health Organization
has developed an inexpensive oral replacement fluid con- A cholera vaccine exists that can be given to travel-
taining appropriate amounts of water, sugar, and salts ers and residents of areas where cholera is known to be
that is used worldwide. In cases of severe dehydration, active,but the vaccine is not highly effective. It provides
replacement fluids must be given intravenously. Patients only 25–50% immunity, and then only for a period of
should be encouraged to drink when they can keep liq- about six months. The vaccine is never given to infants
uids down and eat when their appetite returns. Recovery under six months of age. The United States Centers for
generally takes three to six days. Disease Control and Prevention do not currently recom-
mend cholera vaccination for travelers. Residents of
Adults may be given the antibiotic tetracycline to
cholera-plagued areas should discuss the value of the
shorten the duration of the illness and reduce fluid loss.
vaccine with their doctor.
The World Health Organization recommends this antibi-
otic treatment only in cases of severe dehydration. If
antibioticsare overused,the cholera bacteria organism Resources
may become resistant to the drug,making the antibiotic BOOKS
ineffective in treating even severe cases of cholera. Tetra- USP DI-Volume II,Advice for the Patient:Drug Information in
cycline is not given to children whose permanent teeth Lay Language. 17th ed. 1997.
782 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
arelohC
ORGANIZATIONS stops using oral contraceptives. This condition does not
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., lead to chronic liver disease. A woman who develops
NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435. (404) 639-3311. cholestasis from either of these causes (pregnancy or
<http://www.cdc.gov>. birth control hormones) has an increased risk of develop-
ing cholestasis from the other.
OTHER
“Cholera Prevention.”Centers for Disease Control and Preven- Benign familial recurrent cholestasis is a rare condi-
tion.9 Aug. 1996 <http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/ tion characterized by brief,repeated episodes of itching
cholera/cholera.htm>.
and jaundice. Symptoms often disappear. This condition
Travel Health Information Page.5 Mar. 1997 <http://www.
does not cause cirrhosis.
travelhealth.com>.
Drug-induced cholestasis may be a complication of
Tish Davidson chemotherapyor other medications. The two major types
of drug-induced cholestasis are direct toxic injury and
reactions unique to an individual (idiosyncratic reactions).
In direct toxic injury,the severity of symptoms parallels
the amount of medication involved. This condition:
Cholestasis •develops a short time after treatment begins
Definition •follows a predictable pattern
•usually causes liver damage
Cholestasis is a condition caused by rapidly devel-
oping (acute) or long-term (chronic) interruption in the Direct toxic reactions develop in 1% of all patients
excretion of bile (a digestive fluid that helps the body who take chlorpromazine (Thorazine),a tranquilizer and
process fat). The term is taken from the Greek chole, antinausea drug. Idiosyncratic reactions may occur at the
bile,and stasis,standing still. onset of treatment or at a later time. Allergic responses
are varied and are not related to the amount of medica-
tion being taken.
Description
Cholestasis is caused by obstruction within the liver
(intrahepatic) or outside the liver (extrahepatic). The Causes and symptoms
obstruction causes bile salts,the bile pigment bilirubin,
Intrahepatic cholestasis is usually caused by hepati-
and fats (lipids) to accumulate in the blood stream
tis or by medications that can produce symptoms resem-
instead of being eliminated normally.
bling hepatitis. Phenothiazine-derivative drugs,including
Intrahepatic cholestasis is characterized by wide- chlorpromazine,can cause sudden feverand inflamma-
spread blockage of small ducts or by disorders,such as tion. Symptoms usually disappear after use of the drug(s)
hepatitis,that impair the body’s ability to eliminate bile. is stopped. In rare cases,a condition resembling chronic
Extrahepatic cholestasis can occur as a side effect of biliary cirrhosis (a progressive disease characterized by
many medications. It can also occur as a complication of destruction of small bile ducts) persists even after the
surgery, serious injury, tissue-destroying infection, or medication is stopped. Some patients experience a simi-
intravenous feeding. Extrahepatic cholestasis can be lar reaction in response to tricyclic antidepressants
caused by conditions such as tumors and gallstonesthat (amitriptyline, imipramine), phenylbutazone (Butazo-
block the flow of bile from the gallbladder to the first lidin),erythromycin estolate (Estomycin,Purmycin),and
part of the small intestine (duodenum). other drugs. Intrahepatic cholestasis may also be caused
by alcoholic liver disease, primary biliary cirrhosis,
Pregnancyincreases the sensitivity of the bile ducts
cancerthat has spread (metastasized) from another part
to estrogen,and cholestasis often develops during the sec-
of the body,and a number of rare disorders.
ond and third trimesters of pregnancy. This condition is
the second most common cause of jaundiceduring preg- Extrahepatic cholestasis is most often caused by a stone
nancy,but generalized itching(pruritus gravidarum) is obstructing the passage through which bile travels from the
the only symptom most women experience. Cholestasis gallbladder to the small intestine (common bile duct) or by
of pregnancy tends to run in families. Symptoms usually pancreatic cancer. Less often,the condition occurs as a result
disappear within two to four weeks after the baby’s birth of non-cancerous narrowing of the common duct (strictures),
but may reappear if the woman becomes pregnant again. ductal carcinoma,or disorders of the pancreas.
A similar condition affects some women who take Cholestasis caused by the use of steroids causes lit-
birth-control pills. Symptoms disappear after the woman tle,if any,inflammation. Symptoms develop gradually
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 783
Cholestasis
KEY TERMS
Bile—A bitter yellow-green substance produced by Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—An imaging
the liver. Bile breaks down fats in the small intestine technique that uses a large circular magnet and
so that they can be used by the body. It is stored in radio waves to generate signals from atoms in the
the gallbladder and passes from the gallbladder body. These signals are used to construct images of
through the common bile duct to the top of the internal structures.
small intestine (duodenum) as needed to digest fat.
Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography—An x-
Biliary—Of bile or of the gallbladder and bile ducts
ray examination of the bile ducts. A needle is
that transport bile and make up the biliary system or
passed through the skin (percutaneous) across or
tract.
over the liver (transhepatic) and directly into a bile
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography— duct to inject a contrast dye. The dye enhances the
A diagnostic procedure for mapping the pancreatic x-ray image mapping the system of bile ducts
and common bile ducts. A flexible tube with a light (cholangiography).
transmitter (fiberoptics) is placed in the duct. A con-
trast dye is instilled directly into the duct and a series Phenothiazine-derivative drugs—A large family of
of x-ray images are taken. drugs derived from phenothiazine, a compound
Computed tomography scans (CT)—An imaging that in itself is too poisonous for human consump-
technique in which cross-sectional x rays of the tion. Phenothiazine derivatives include tranquiliz-
body are compiled to create a three-dimensional ers, medications that prevent vomiting, antihista-
image of the body’s internal structures. mines, and drugs used to enhance the effectiveness
of anesthesia.
Hepatic—Of the liver, from the Greek hepar.
Liver function tests—Tests used to evaluate liver Ultrasonography—A test using sound waves to
metabolism, storage, filtration, and excretion. The measure blood flow. Gel is applied to a hand-held
tests include alkaline phosphatase and serum alanine transducer that is pressed against the patient’s body.
aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase. Images are displayed on a monitor.
and usually disappear after the drug is discontinued. Symptoms of both intrahepatic and extrahepatic
Other drugs that can cause cholestasis include: cholestasis include a yellow discoloration of the skin
(jaundice),dark urine,and pale stools. Itching over the
•allopurinol (Zyloprim)
skin may be severe if the condition is advanced.
•amitriptyline (Elavil)
Symptoms of chronic cholestasis include:
•azathioprine (Imuran)
•skin discoloration
•benoxaprofen (Oraflex)
•scars or skin injuries caused by scratching
•capotril (Capoten)
•bone pain
•carbamazepine (Tegretol) •yellowish fat deposits beneath the surface of the skin
(xanthoma) or around the eyes (xanthelasma)
•cimetidine (Tagamet)
Patients with advanced cholestasis feel ill,tire easi-
•hydralazine hydrochloride (Apresoline Hydrochloride)
ly, and are often nauseated. Abdominal pain and such
•imipramine (Tofranil) systemic symptoms as anorexia,vomiting,and fever are
•penicillin usually due to the underlying condition that causes
cholestasis.
•quinidine sulfate (Quinidex)
•ranitidine (Zantac)
Diagnosis
•sulfonamides (Apo-Sulfatrim,sulfamethoxazole)
Determining whether obstruction exists inside or
•sulindac (Clinoril,Saldac) outside the liver is the essential part of diagnosis. A his-
784 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisatselohC
tory of hepatitis or heavy drinking,recent use of certain Treatment
drugs,and symptoms like ascites(abnormal abdominal
The goal of treatment is to eliminate or control the
swelling) and splenomegaly (enlarged spleen) suggest
patient’s symptoms. Discontinuing the use of certain
intrahepatic cholestasis. Pain or rigidity in the gallblad-
drugs can restore normal liver function,but surgery may
der or pancreas suggest an extrahepatic form.
be needed to drain or remove obstructions or to widen
Blood tests and liver function testscan reveal the affected ducts.
pattern and extent of liver injury, indicate functional
Rifampin (Rifadin, Rimactane), an antibacterial
abnormalities,and establish the cause of the condition.
drug; phenobarbital, a barbiturate anticonvulsant; and
However,most misdiagnoses occur when physicians rely
other drugs are sometimes prescribed to cleanse the sys-
more on laboratory analysis than on detailed medical his-
tem and eliminate bile salts and other toxic compounds.
tory and the results of a thorough physical examination.
Special attention should be paid to three liver function Patients who have chronic cholestasis and have trou-
tests. Levels of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine ble digesting fat may have to restrict the amount of fat in
aminotransferase (ALT),and aspartate aminotransferase their diet and take calcium and water-soluble vitamin
(AST) can indicate whether the patient’s condition is supplements. A liver transplant may become necessary if
caused by an obstructive condition like cholestasis or a complications occur.
disease of the liver cells (hepatocellular disease) like
viral hepatitis or cancer. ALP levels more than three Prognosis
times greater than normal indicate cholestasis. High lev-
Symptoms almost always disappear after the under-
els of AST and particularly of ALT,which is found pre-
lying condition is controlled.
dominantly in liver cells,indicate hepatocellular disease.
Some patients who have cholestasis experience symp-
Once the disease pattern has been established,ultra- toms only after infection develops,but chronic bile-duct
sound may be performed to determine whether obstruc- obstruction always leads to cirrhosis. It may also cause
tion of the large duct has caused widening of small ducts osteoporosis(fragile bones) or osteomalacia (soft bones).
located close to it. Computed tomography scans(CT)
Emergency care is not required unless inflammation
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can provide
of the bile ducts (cholangitis) develops. Cancer should
more detailed information about the source of the
be considered when an adult suddenly develops cholesta-
obstruction. If these procedures that do not enter the
sis after the age of 50.
patient’s body (non-invasive procedures) do not provide
the information a family physician,internist,or gastroen-
terologist needs to make a diagnosis of cholestasis,one Resources
of these procedures may be performed: BOOKS
•direct cholangiography,an x-ray map of the bile ducts, Bennett,J. Claude,and Fred Plum,eds. Cecil Textbook of Med-
icine.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
enhanced by the use of contrast dye
PERIODICALS
•percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography, used to
Pasha T. M.,and K. D. Lindor. “Diagnosis and Therapy of
identify obstructions that impede the flow of bile from
Cholestatic Liver Disease.”Medical Clinics of North
the liver to the digestive system,takes x-ray images of
America80 (Sept. 1996):995-1019.
the bile ducts after a contrast dye has been injected by a
needle passed directly into a hepatic duct ORGANIZATIONS
American Liver Foundation. 1425 Pompton Ave.,Cedar Grove,
•endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
NJ 07009. (800) 223-0179. <http://www.liverfoundation.
(ERCP),which uses a special dye to outline the pancre- org>.
atic and common bile ducts and highlight the position National Institute of Diabetes,Digestive,and Kidney Diseases
of any obstruction; a special tube with a light transmit- of the National Institutes of Health. 31 Center Drive,
ter is inserted into the duct and a series of x-ray images Bethesda,MD 20892-2560. (301) 496-3583. <http://
is taken www.niddk.nih/gov>.
National Organization for Rare Disorders. P.O. Box 8923,New
A doctor who thinks a physical obstruction is
Fairfield,CT 06812-8923. (800) 999-6673. <http://www.
responsible for progressive deterioration of a patient’s rarediseases.org>.
condition may consider an exploratory surgical proce-
OTHER
dure (diagnostic laparotomy). Liver biopsyis sometimes
“Hepatic and Biliary Disorders.”The Meck Page.13 Apr. 1998
performed if imaging tests do not indicate why a duct is
<http://www.merck.com>.
enlarged,but results of a single biopsy may not represent
the status of the entire organ. Maureen Haggerty
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 785
Cholestasis
Cholesterol, high
Definition
Cholesterol is a fatty substance found in animal tis-
sue and is an important component to the human body. It
is manufactured in the liver and carried throughout the
body in the bloodstream. Problems can occur when too
much cholesterol forms an accumulation of plaque on
blood vessel walls, which impedes blood flow to the
heart and other organs. The highest cholesterol content is
found in meat,poultry,shellfish,and dairy products.
Description
Cholesterol is the Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde of medi-
cine,since it has both a good side and bad side. It is nec-
essary to digest fats from food,make hormones,build cell
walls,and participate in other processes for maintaining a
healthy body. When people talk about cholesterol as a
medical problem,they are usually referring to high cho-
Causes and symptoms
lesterol. This can be somewhat misleading,since there are
four components to cholesterol. These are: There are no readily apparent symptoms that indi-
cate high LDL or triglycerides, or low HDL. The only
•LDL,the so-called bad cholesterol
way to diagnose the problems is through a simple blood
•HDL,the so-called good cholesterol
test. However,one general indication of high cholesterol
•triglycerides,a blood fat lipid that increases the risk for is obesity. Another is a high-fat diet.
heart disease
•total cholesterol Diagnosis
High LDL (low-density lipoprotein) is a major con- High cholesterol is often diagnosed and treated by
tributing factor of heart disease. The cholesterol forms general practitioners or family practice physicians. In
plaque in the heart’s blood vessels, which restricts or some cases,the condition is treated by an endocrinolo-
blocks the supply of blood to the heart, and causes a gist or cardiologist. Total cholesterol, LDL, HDL, and
condition called atherosclerosis. This can lead to a triglyceride levels as well as the cholesterol to HDL ratio
“heart attack,”resulting in damage to the heart and pos- are measured by a blood test called a lipid panel. The
sibly death. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration cost of a lipid panel is generally $40–100 and is covered
(FDA) estimates that 90 million American adults, by most health insurance and HMO plans, including
roughly half the adult population,have elevated choles- Medicare, providing there is an appropriate reason for
terol levels. the test. Home cholesterol testing kits are available over
the counter but test only for total cholesterol. The results
The population as a whole is at some risk of devel-
should only be used as a guide and if the total cholesterol
oping high LDL cholesterol in their lifetimes. Specific
level is high or low,a lipid panel should be performed by
risk factors include a family history of high choles-
a physician. In most adults the recommended levels,
terol,obesity,heart attackor stroke,alcoholism,and
measured by milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) of blood,
lack of regular exercise. The chances of developing
are:total cholesterol,less than 200; LDL,less than 130;
high cholesterol increase after the age of 45. One of the
HDL,more than 35; triglycerides,30–200; and choles-
primary causes of high LDL cholesterol is too much fat
terol to HDL ratio, four to one. However, the recom-
or sugar in the diet, a problem especially true in the
mended cholesterol levels may vary,depending on other
United States. Cholesterol is also produced naturally in
risk factors such as hypertension, a family history of
the liver and overproduction may occur even in people
heart disease,diabetes,age,alcoholism,and smoking.
who limit their intake of high cholesterol food. Low
HDL and high triglyceride levels are also risk factors Doctors have always been puzzled by why some
for atherosclerosis. people develop heart disease while others with identical
786 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
hgih
,loretselohC
Types Of Cholesterol
Types Levels
Total cholesterol:
Desirable <200
Borderline 200 to 240
Undesirable >240
HDL cholesterol:
Desirable >45
Borderline 35 to 45
Undesirable <35
LDL cholesterol:
Desirable <130
Borderline 130 to 160
Undesirable >160
Ratio of total cholesterol to HDL cholesterol:
Desirable <3
Borderline 3 to 4
Undesirable >4
HDL and LDL levels do not. New studies indicate it may
be due to the size of the cholesterol particles in the KEY TERMS
bloodstream. A test called a nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) LipoProfile exposes a blood sample to a magnet- Atherosclerosis—A build-up of fatty substances in
ic field to determine the size of the cholesterol particles. the inner layers of the arteries.
Particle size can also be determined by a centrifugation
Estrogen—A hormone that stimulates develop-
test,where blood samples are spun very quickly to allow
ment of female secondary sex characteristics.
particles to separate and move at different distances. The
smaller the particles,the greater the chance of develop- Glycemic—The presence of glucose in the blood.
ing heart disease. It allows physicians to treat patients Hypertension—Abnormally high blood pressure
who have normal or close to normal results from a lipid in the arteries.
panel but abnormal particle size.
Legumes—A family of plants that bear edible
seeds in pods, including beans and peas.
Treatment
Lipid—Any of a variety of substances that, along
A wide variety of prescription medicines are avail- with proteins and carbohydrates, make up the
able to treat cholesterol problems. These include statins main structural components of living cells.
such as Mevacor (lovastatin),Lescol (fluvastatin),Prava- Polyunsaturated fats—A non-animal oil or fatty
chol (pravastatin),Zocor (simvastatin),Baycol (cervas- acid rich in unsaturated chemical bonds not associ-
tatin),and Lipitor (atorvastatin) to lower LDL. A group ated with the formation of cholesterol in the blood.
of drugs called fibric acid derivatives are used to lower
triglycerides and raise HDL. These include Lopid (gem-
fibrozil),Atromid-S (clofibrate),and Tricor (fenofibrate).
Doctors decide which drug to use based on the severity
ans. The vegetarian low-cholesterol diet consists of at
of the cholesterol problem,side effects,and cost.
least six servings of whole grain foods, three or more
servings of green leafy vegetables,two to four servings
Alternative treatment of fruit,two to four servings of legumes,and one or two
servings of non-fat dairy products daily.
The primary goal of cholesterol treatment is to lower
LDL to under 160 mg/dL in people without heart disease A second diet is the Asian diet, with brown rice
and who are at lower risk of developing it. The goal in being the staple. Other allowable foods include fish,veg-
people with higher risk factors for heart disease is less than etables such as bok choy,bean sprouts,and black beans.
130 mg/dL. In patients who already have heart disease,the It allows for one weekly serving of meat and very few
goal is under 100 mg/dL,according to FDA guidelines. dairy products. The food is flavored with traditional
Also,since low HDL levels increase the risks of heart dis- Asian spices and condiments, such as ginger, chilies,
ease,the goal of all patients is more than 35 mg/dL. turmeric,and soy sauce.
In both alternative and conventional treatment of Another regimen is the low glycemic or diabetic
high cholesterol,the first-line treatment options are exer- diet,which can raise the HDL (good cholesterol) level by
cise, diet, weight loss, and stopping smoking. Other as much as 20% in three weeks. Low glycemic foods
alternative treatments include high doses of niacin,soy promote a slow but steady rise in blood sugar levels fol-
protein,garlic,algae,and the Chinese medicine supple- lowing a meal,which increases the level of HDL. They
ment Cholestin (a red yeast fermented with rice). also lower total cholesterol and triglycerides. Low
glycemic foods include certain fruits,vegetables,beans,
Diet and exercise and whole grains. Processed and refined foods and sug-
ars should be avoided.
Since a large number of people with high cholesterol
are overweight, a healthy diet and regular exercise are Exercise is an extremely important part of lowering
probably the most beneficial natural ways to control cho- bad cholesterol and raising good cholesterol. It should
lesterol levels. In general, the goal is to substantially consist of 20–30 minutes of vigorous aerobic exercise at
reduce or eliminate foods high in animal fat. These least three times a week. Exercises that cause the heart to
include meat,shellfish,eggs,and dairy products. Several beat faster include fast walking,bicycling,jogging,roller
specific diet options are beneficial. One is the vegetarian skating,swimming,and walking up stairs. There are also
diet. Vegetarians typically get up to 100% more fiber and a wide selection of aerobic programs available at gyms
up to 50% less cholesterol from food than non-vegetari- or on videocassette.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 787
Cholesterol,
high
Garlic can clog the blood vessels, leading to chest pain
(angina),blood clots,and heart attacks. Heart disease is
A number of clinical studies have indicated that garlic
the number one killer of men and women in the United
can offer modest reductions in cholesterol. A 1997 study by
States. By reducing LDL,people with heart disease may
nutrition researchers at Pennsylvania State University
prevent further heart attacks and strokes, prolong and
found men who took garlic capsules for five months
improve the quality of their lives, and slow or reverse
reduced their total cholesterol by 7% and LDL by 12%.
cholesterol build-up in the arteries. In people without
Another study showed that seven cloves of fresh garlic a day
heart disease,lowering LDL can decrease the risk of a
significantly reduced LDL,as did a daily dose of four garlic
first heart attack or stroke.
extract pills. Other studies in 1997 and 1998 back up these
results. However,two more recent studies have questioned
the effectiveness of garlic in lowering “bad cholesterol.” Prevention
The best way to prevent cholesterol problems is
Cholestin
through a combination of healthy lifestyle activities,a
Cholestin hit the over-the-counter market in 1997 as primarily low-fat and high-fiber diet, regular aerobic
a cholesterol-lowering dietary supplement. It is a exercise, not smoking, and maintaining an optimal
processed form of red yeast fermented with rice,a tradi- weight. But for people with high risk factors for heart
tional herbal remedy used for centuries by the Chinese. disease,such as a family history of heart disease,dia-
Two studies released in 1998 showed Cholestin lowered betes, and being over the age of 45, these measures
LDL cholesterol by 20–30%. It also appeared to raise may not be enough to prevent the onset of high choles-
HDL and lower triglyceride levels. Although the supple- terol. There are studies being done on the effective-
ment contains hundreds of compounds,the major active ness of some existing anti-cholesterol drugs for con-
LDL-lowering ingredient is lovastatin, a chemical also trolling cholesterol levels in patients who do not meet
found in the prescription drug Mevacor. The FDA banned the criteria for high cholesterol but no definitive
Cholestin in early 1998 but a federal district court judge results are available.
lifted the ban a year later,ruling the product was a dietary
supplement,not a drug. It is not fully understood how the Resources
substance works and patients may want to consult with
BOOKS
their physician before taking Cholestin. No serious side
Bratman,Steven,and David Kroll. Natural Pharmacist:Natur-
effects have been reported,but minor side effects,includ-
al Treatments for High Cholesterol.Roseville,CA:Prima
ing bloating and heartburn,have been reported.
Publishing,2000.
Ingels,Darin. The Natural Pharmacist:Your Complete Guide
Other treatments
to Garlic and Cholesterol.Roseville,CA:Prima Publish-
A study released in 1999 indicated that blue-green ing,1999.
algae contains polyunsaturated fatty acids that lower Murray,Michael T. Natural Alternatives to Over-the-Counter
cholesterol. The algae, known as alga Aphanizomenon and Prescription Drugs.New York:William Morrow &
Co.,1999.
flos-aquae (AFA) is available as an over-the-counter
Trubo,Richard. Cholesterol Cures:From Almonds and Antiox-
dietary supplement. Niacin,also known as nicotinic acid
idants to Garlic,Golf,Wine and Yogurt.Emmaus,PA:
or vitamin B,has been shown to reduce LDL levels by
3 Rodale Press,1996.
10–20%, and raise HDL levels by 15–35%. It also can
reduce triglycerides. But because an extremely high dose PERIODICALS
of niacin (2–3 g) is needed to treat cholesterol problems, Carter,Ann. “Cholesterol in Your Diet.”Clinical Reference
Systems(July 1,1999):282.
it should only be taken under a doctor’s supervision to
Marandino,Cristin. “The Case for Cholesterol.”Vegetarian
monitor possible toxic side effects. Niacin can also cause
Times(August 1999):10.
flushing when taken in high doses. Soy protein with high
Schmitt,B.D. “Treating High Cholesterol Levels.”Clinical
levels of isoflavones also have been shown to reduce bad
Reference Systems(July 1,1999):1551.
cholesterol by up to 10%. A daily diet that contains 62
VanTyne,Julia,and Davis,Lori. “Drop Your Cholesterol 25 to
mg of isoflavones in soy protein is recommended, and 100 Points.”Prevention(November 1999):110.
can be incorporated into other diet regimens,including
ORGANIZATIONS
vegetarian,Asian,and low glycemic.
National Cholesterol Education Program. NHLBI Information
Center,P.O. Box 30105,Bethesda,MD 20824-0105.
Prognosis
<http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
High cholesterol is one of the key risk factors for
heart disease. Left untreated,too much bad cholesterol Ken R. Wells
788 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
hgih
,loretselohC
HMG-CoA inhibitors, often called “statins,” are
Cholesterol-reducing drugs drugs that block an enzyme called “3-hydroxy-3-methyl-
glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase.”This blocks one of the
Definition
steps in converting fat to cholesterol. These are the most
Cholesterol-reducing drugs are medicines that lower effective cholesterol lowering agents available. Drugs in
the amount of cholesterol (a fat-like substance) in the this group include: atorvastatin (Lipitor); cerivastatin
blood. (Baycol); fluvastatin (Lescol); lovastatin (Mevacor);
pravastatin (Pravachol); and simvastatin (Zocor).
Fibric acid derivatives include clofibrate (Atromid-
Purpose
S); gemfibrozil (Lopid); and fenofibrate (Tricor).
Cholesterol is a chemical that can both benefit and Although these drugs are less effective than the statins at
harm the body. On the good side,cholesterol plays impor- lowering total cholesterol,they may be able to lower the
tant roles in the structure of cells and in the production of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol while raising
hormones. But too much cholesterol in the blood can lead the high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Their
to heart and blood vessel disease. To complicate matters, exact mechanism of action is believed to be associated
not all cholesterol contributes to heart and blood vessel with inhibition of lipoprotein lipase activity.
problems. One type, called high-density lipoprotein Niacin, vitamin B-3, is also effective in lowering
(HDL) cholesterol,or “good cholesterol,”actually lowers cholesterol levels. Although the normal vitamin dose of
the risk of these problems. The other type,low-density niacin is only 20 mg,the dose required to reduce choles-
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol,or “bad cholesterol,”is the terol levels is at least 500 mg each day. The mechanism
type that threatens people’s health. The names reflect the of action of niacin in cholesterol reduction is associated
way cholesterol moves through the body. To travel with the inhibition of VLDL secretion in the blood-
through the bloodstream,cholesterol must attach itself to stream.
a protein. The combination of a protein and a fatty sub-
stance like cholesterol is called a lipoprotein. Recommended dosage
Many factors may contribute to the fact that some The recommended dosage depends on the type of
people have higher cholesterol levels than others. A diet cholesterol-reducing drug used. The prescribing physi-
high in certain types of fats is one factor. Medical prob- cian or the pharmacist who filled the prescription can
lems such as poorly controlled diabetes,an underactive advise about the correct dosage.
thyroid gland,an overactive pituitary gland,liver disease
Cholesterol-reducing drugs should be taken exactly
or kidney failure also may cause high cholesterollevels.
as directed and doses should not be missed. Double
And some people have inherited disorders that prevent
doses should not be taken to make up for a missed dose.
their bodies from properly using and eliminating fats.
Physicians may prescribe a combination of choles-
This allows cholesterol to build up in the blood.
terol-reducing drugs,such as pravastatin and colestipol.
Treatment for high cholesterol levels usually begins
Following the directions for how and when to take the
with changes in daily habits. By losing weight,stopping
drugs is very important. The medicine may not work
smoking,exercising more and reducing the amount of
properly if both drugs are taken at the same time of day.
fat and cholesterol in the diet, many people can bring
Niacin should not be taken at the same time as an
their cholesterol levels down to acceptable levels. How-
HMG-CoA inhibitor, as this combination may cause
ever,some may need to use cholesterol-reducing drugs to
severe muscle problems. If niacin is taken in an over-the-
reduce their risk of health problems.
counter form,both the prescribing physician and phar-
macist should be informed. There are no problems when
Description the niacin is taken in normal doses as a vitamin.
There are four different classes of cholesterol lower- The prescription should not be stopped without first
ing drugs: checking with the physician who prescribed it. Choles-
terol levels may increase when the medicine is stopped,
Bile acid sequesterants are drugs that act by binding
and the physician may prescribe a special diet to make
with the bile produced by the liver. Bile helps the diges-
this less likely.
tion and absorption of fats in the intestine. By blocking
the digestion of fats,bile acid sequesterants prevent the
Precautions
formation of cholesterol. Drugs in this class include:
cholestyramine (Questran); colestipol (Colestid); and Seeing a physician regularly while taking cholesterol-
colesevalam (Welchol). reducing drugs is important. The physician will check to
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 789
Cholesterol-reducing
drugs
make sure the medicine is working as it should and will Cholestyramine and colestipol will not directly harm
decide whether it is still needed. Blood tests and other an unborn baby,because these drugs are not taken into
medical tests may be ordered to help the physician moni- the body. However, the drugs may keep the mother’s
tor the drug’s effectiveness and check for side effects. body from absorbing vitamins that she and the baby
need. Pregnant women who take these drugs should ask
For most people,cholesterol-reducing drugs are just
their physicians whether they need to take extra vitamins.
one part of a whole program for lowering cholesterol lev-
els. Other important elements of the program may BREASTFEEDING. Because cholestyramine and cole-
include weight loss,exercise,special dietsand changes stipol interfere with the absorption of vitamins,women
in other habits. The medication should never be viewed who use these drugs while breastfeeding should ask their
as a substitute for other measures ordered by the physi- physicians if they need to take extra vitamins.
cian. Cholesterol-reducing drugs will not cure problems
Women who are breastfeeding should talk to their
that cause high cholesterol; they will only help control
physicians before using gemfibrozil. Whether this drug
cholesterol levels.
passes into breast milk is not known. But because animal
People over 60 years of age may be unusually sensi- studies suggest that it may increase the risk of some
tive to the effects of some cholesterol-reducing drugs. types of cancer, women should carefully consider the
This may increase the chance of side effects. safety of using it while breastfeeding.
Anyone who is taking an HMG-CoA reductase HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (such as lovastatin,
inhibitor should notify the health care professional in pravastatin, fluvastatin and simvastatin) should not be
charge before having any surgical or dental procedures or used by women who are breastfeeding their babies.
receiving emergency treatment.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Cholesterol-reduc-
ing drugs may make some medical problems worse.
Special conditions Before using these drugs,people with any of these med-
ical conditions should make sure their physicians are
People who have certain medical conditions or who
aware of their conditions:
are taking certain other medications may have problems
if they take cholesterol-reducing drugs. Before taking •stomach problems,including stomach ulcer
these drugs, the prescribing physician should be
•constipation
informed of any of the following conditions:
•hemorrhoids
ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions
•gallstonesor gallbladder disease
to cholesterol-reducing drugs in the past should inform
the prescribing physician before taking the drugs again. •bleeding problems
The physician should also be told about any allergiesto
•underactive thyroid
foods,dyes,preservatives,or other substances.
•heart or blood vessel disease
PREGNANCY. Studies of laboratory animals have
In addition,people with kidney or liver disease may
shown that giving high doses of gemfibrozil during
be more likely to have blood problems or other side
pregnancyincreases the risk of birth defectsand other
effects when they take certain cholesterol-reducing
problems, including death of the unborn baby. The
drugs. And some drugs of this type may actually raise
effects of this drug have not been studied in pregnant
cholesterol levels in people with liver disease.
women. Women who are pregnant or who may become
pregnant should check with their physicians before Patients with any of the following medical condi-
using gemfibrozil. tions may develop problems that could lead to kidney
failure if they take HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors:
Cholesterol-reducing drugs in the group known as
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (such as lovastatin,flu- •treatments to prevent rejection after an organ transplant
vastatin,pravastatin and simvastatin) should not be taken •recent major surgery
by women who are pregnant or who plan to become
•seizures (convulsions) that are not well controlled
pregnant soon. By blocking the production of choles-
terol,these drugs prevent a fetus from developing proper- People with phenylketonuria (PKU) should be
ly. Women who are able to bear children should use an aware that sugar-free formulations of some cholesterol-
effective birth control method while taking these drugs. reducing drugs contain phenylalanine in aspartame. This
Any woman who becomes pregnant while taking these ingredient can cause problems in people who have
drugs should check with her physician immediately. phenylketonuria.
790 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sgurd
gnicuder-loretselohC
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Cholesterol-reducing
drugs may change the effects of other medicines. Patients KEY TERMS
should not take any other medicine that has not been pre-
scribed or approved by a physician who knows they are Cell—The basic unit that makes up all living tissue.
taking cholesterol-reducing drugs.
Cholesterol—Fatty substance found in tissue. Nec-
essary to maintain a healthy body.
Side effects
Enzyme—A type of protein, produced in the body,
Gemfibrozil that brings about or speeds up chemical reactions.
Studies in animals and humans suggest that gemfi- Hormone—A substance that is produced in one
brozil increases the risk of some types of cancer. The drug part of the body, then travels through the blood-
may also cause gallstones or muscle problems. Patients stream to another part of the body where it has its
who need to take this medicine should ask their physi- effect.
cians for the latest information on its benefits and risks. Phenylketonuria—(PKU) A genetic disorder in
Patients taking gemfibrozil should check with a which the body lacks an important enzyme. If
physician immediately if any of these side effects occur: untreated, the disorder can lead to brain damage
and mental retardation.
•fever or chills
Pituitary gland—A pea-sized gland at the base of
•severe stomach painwith nausea and vomiting
the brain that produces many hormones that affect
•pain in the lower back or side growth and body functions.
•pain or difficulty when urinating
•cough or hoarseness
she is taking and should ask whether the possible interac-
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors tions can interfere with drug therapy. Examples of possi-
ble interactions are listed below.
These drugs may damage the liver or muscles.
Patients who take the drugs should have blood tests to Some cholesterol-reducing drugs may prevent the
check for liver damage as often as their physician recom- following medicines from working properly:
mends. Any unexplained pain,tenderness or weakness in
•thyroid hormones
the muscles should be reported to the physician at once.
•water pills (diuretics)
All cholesterol-reducing drugs •certain antibiotics taken by mouth, such as tetracy-
clines,penicillin G and vancomycin
Minor side effects such as heartburn,indigestion,
•the beta-blocker Inderal,used to treat high blood pressure
belching, bloating, gas, nausea or vomiting, stomach
pain, dizziness and headache usually go away as the •digitalis heart medicines
body adjusts to the drug and do not require medical treat- •phenylbutazone,a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
ment unless they continue or they interfere with normal
Taking some cholesterol-reducing drugs with blood
activities.
thinners (anticoagulants) may increase the chance of
Patients who have constipation while taking choles- bleeding.
terol-reducing drugs should bring the problem to a physi-
Combining HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors with
cian’s attention as soon as possible.
gemfibrozil,cyclosporine (Sandimmune) or niacin may
Additional side effects are possible. Anyone who has cause or worsen problems with the kidneys or muscles.
unusual symptoms while taking cholesterol-reducing
drugs should get in touch with his or her physician.
Resources
BOOKS
Interactions
Nesto,R. W.,and L. Christensen. Cholesterol-Lowering
Drugs:Everything You and Your Family Need to Know.
Cholesterol-reducing drugs may interact with other
New York:Morrow,William & Co,2000.
medicines. When this happens,the effects of one or both
Parsons,W. B. Cholesterol Control Without Diet! The Niacin
of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects may
Solution.Scottsdale,AZ:Lilac Press,1998.
be greater. Anyone who takes cholesterol-reducing drugs
should let the physician know all other medicines he or Nancy Ross-Flanigan
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 791
Cholesterol-reducing
drugs
mended limits,and giving up smokingcan increase the
Cholesterol test body’s levels of HDL cholesterol. HDL is known as
“good cholesterol.”
Definition
Because of the difference in density and cholesterol
The cholesterol test is a quantitative analysis of the content of lipoproteins,two patients with the same total
cholesterol levels in a sample of the patient’s blood. Total cholesterol level can have very different lipid profiles
serum cholesterol (TC) is the measurement routinely taken. and different risk for CAD. The critical factor is the level
Doctors sometimes order a complete lipoprotein profile to of HDL cholesterol in the blood serum. Some doctors
better evaluate the risk for atherosclerosis (coronary use the ratio of the total cholesterol level to HDL choles-
artery disease,or CAD). The full lipoprotein profile also terol when assessing the patient’s degree of risk. A low
includes measurements of triglyceride levels (a chemical TC/HDL ratio is associated with a lower degree of risk.
compound that forms 95% of the fats and oils stored in ani-
mal or vegetable cells) and lipoproteins (high density and Purpose
low density). Blood fats are also called “lipids.”
The purpose of the TC test is to measure the levels
The type of cholesterol in the blood is as important as of cholesterol in the patient’s blood. The patient’s choles-
the total quantity. Cholesterol is a fatty substance and can- terol can also be fractionated (separated into different
not be dissolved in water. It must combine with a protein portions) in order to determine the TC/HDL ratio. The
molecule called a lipoprotein in order to be transported in results help the doctor to assess the patient’s risk for
the blood. There are five major types of lipoproteins in the coronary artery disease (CAD). High LDL levels are
human body; they differ in the amount of cholesterol that associated with increased risk of CAD whereas high
they carry in comparison to other fats and fatty acids,and HDL levels are associated with relatively lower risk.
in their functions in the body. Lipoproteins are classified,
In addition, the results of the cholesterol test can
as follows,according to their density:
assist the doctor in evaluating the patient’s metabolism of
•Chylomicrons. These are normally found in the blood fat,or in diagnosing inflammation of the pancreas,liver
only after a person has eaten foods containing fats. disease,or disorders of the thyroid gland.
They contain about 7% cholesterol. Chylomicrons The frequency of cholesterol testing depends on the
transport fats and cholesterol from the intestine into the patient’s degree of risk for CAD. People with low choles-
liver and then into the bloodstream. They are metabo- terol levels may need to be tested once every five years.
lized in the process of carrying food energy to muscle People with high levels of blood cholesterol should be
and fat cells. tested more frequently,according to their doctor’s advice.
•Very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL). These lipopro- The doctor may recommend a detailed evaluation of the
teins carry mostly triglycerides,but they also contain different types of lipids in the patient’s blood. It is ideal to
16–22% cholesterol. VLDLs are made in the liver and check the HDL and triglycerides as well as the cholesterol
eventually become IDL particles after they have lost and LDL. In addition,the National Cholesterol Education
their triglyceride content. Program (NCEP) suggests further evaluation if the patient
has any of the symptoms of CAD or if she or he has two
•Intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL). IDLs are
or more of the following risk factors for CAD:
short-lived lipoproteins containing about 30% choles-
•male sex
terol that are converted in the liver to low-density
lipoproteins (LDLs). •high blood pressure
•Low-density lipoproteins (LDL). LDL molecules carry •smoking
cholesterol from the liver to other body tissues. They •diabetes
contain about 50% cholesterol. Extra LDLs are absorbed
•low HDL levels
by the liver and their cholesterol is excreted into the bile.
LDL particles are involved in the formation of plaques •family history of CAD before age 55
(abnormal deposits of cholesterol) in the walls of the
coronary arteries. LDL is known as “bad cholesterol.” Precautions
•High-density lipoproteins (HDL). HDL molecules are Patients who are seriously ill or hospitalized for
made in the intestines and the liver. HDLs are about surgery should not be given cholesterol tests because the
50% protein and 19% cholesterol. They help to remove results will not indicate the patient’s normal cholesterol
cholesterol from artery walls. Lifestyle changes, level. Acute illness, high fever, starvation, or recent
including exercising, keeping weight within recom- surgery lowers blood cholesterol levels.
792 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tset
loretselohC
KEY TERMS
Atherosclerosis—A disease of the coronary arteries uble in water, but soluble in alcohol. Fats, waxes,
in which cholesterol is deposited in plaques on the and oils are examples of lipids.
arterial walls. The plaque narrows or blocks blood
Lipoprotein—A complex molecule that consists of
flow to the heart. Atherosclerosis is sometimes
a protein membrane surrounding a core of lipids.
called coronary artery disease, or CAD.
Lipoproteins carry cholesterol and other lipids from
Fractionation—A laboratory test or process in the digestive tract to the liver and other body tis-
which blood or another fluid is broken down into sues. There are five major types of lipoproteins.
its components. Fractionation can be used to assess
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)—A type of lipopro-
the proportions of the different types of cholesterol
tein that consists of about 50% cholesterol and is
in a blood sample.
associated with an increased risk of CAD.
High-density lipoprotein (HDL)—A type of lipopro-
Plaque—An abnormal deposit of hardened choles-
tein that protects against CAD by removing choles-
terol on the wall of an artery.
terol deposits from arteries or preventing their for-
Triglyceride—A chemical compound that forms
mation.
about 95% of the fats and oils stored in animal and
Hypercholesterolemia—The presence of excessive-
vegetable cells. Triglyceride levels are sometimes
ly high levels of cholesterol in the blood.
measured as well as cholesterol when a patient is
Lipid—Any organic compound that is greasy, insol- screened for heart disease.
Description some may have a small bruise or swelling. A washcloth
soaked in warm water usually relieves any discomfort. In
The cholesterol test requires a sample of the
addition,the patient should resume taking any prescrip-
patient’s blood. Fastingbefore the test is required to get
tion medications that were discontinued before the test.
an accurate triglyceride and LDL level. The blood is
withdrawn by the usual vacuum tube technique from one
Risks
of the patient’s veins. The blood test takes between three
The primary risk to the patient is a mild stinging or
and five minutes.
burning sensation during the venipuncture,with minor
swelling or bruising afterward.
Preparation
Patients who are scheduled for a lipid profile test
Normal results
should fast (except for water) for 12–14 hours before the
The “normal”values for serum lipids depend on the
blood sample is drawn. If the patient’s cholesterol is to
patient’s age,sex,and race. Normal values for people in
be fractionated,he or she should also avoid alcohol for
Western countries are usually given as 140–220 mg/dL in
24 hours before the test.
adults,although as many as 5% of the population has TC
Patients should also stop taking any medications that higher than 300 mg/dL. Among Asians,the figures are
may affect the accuracy of the test results. These include about 20% lower. As a rule,both TC and LDL levels rise
corticosteroids,estrogen or androgens,oral contracep- as people get older.
tives,some diuretics,haloperidol,some antibiotics,and
Some doctors prefer to speak of “desired” rather
niacin. Antilipemics are drugs that lower the concentra-
than “normal” cholesterol values, on the grounds that
tion of fatty substances in the blood. When these are
“normal”refers to statistically average levels that may
taken by the patient,blood testing may be done frequent-
still be too high for good health. Desirable values are as
ly to evaluate the liver function as well as lipids. The
follows:
patient’s doctor will give the patient a list of specific
medications to be discontinued before the test. •Total cholesterol (TC):less than 200 mg/dL
•HDL cholesterol:40–70 mg/dL in males,40–80 mg/dL
in females
Aftercare
•LDL cholesterol:less than 130 mg/dL
Aftercare includes routine care of the skin around the
needle puncture. Most patients have no aftereffects,but •TC/HDL ratio:under 4.0 in males,3.8 in females.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 793
Cholesterol
test
Abnormal results Purpose
It is possible for blood cholesterol levels to be too Cholinergic drugs produce the same effects as acetyl-
low as well as too high. choline. Acetylcholine is the most common neurohor-
mone of the parasympathetic nervous system,the part of
Abnormally low levels the peripheral nervous system responsible for the every
TC levels less than 160 mg/dL are associated with day work of the body. While the sympathetic nervous sys-
higher mortality rates from cancer,liver disease,respira- tem acts during times of excitation,the parasympathetic
tory disorders, and injuries. The connection between system deals with everyday activities such as salivation,
unusually low cholesterol and increased mortality is not digestion,and muscle relaxation.
clear,although some researchers think that the low level
The cholinergic drugs may be used in several ways.
is a secondary sign of the underlying disease and not the
The cholinergic muscle stimulants are used to diagnose and
cause of disease or death.
treat myathenia gravis,a disease that causes severe muscle
Low levels of serum cholesterol are also associated weakness. This class of drugs includes ambenonium chlo-
with malnutritionor hyperthyroidism. Further diagnos- ride (Mytelase),edrophonium chloride (Tensilon),neostig-
tic testing may be necessary in order to locate the cause. mine (Prostigmine),and piridogstimina (Mestinón). These
drugs are also widely used in surgery,both to reduce the
Abnormally high levels risk of urinary retention,and to reverse the effects of the
muscle relaxant drugs that are used in surgery.
Prior to 1980,hypercholesterolemia(an abnormal-
ly high TC level) was defined as any value above the Cholinergic drugs are also used in control of glauco-
95th percentile for the population. These figures ranged ma,a disease that is caused by increased pressure inside
from 210 mg/dL in persons younger than 20 to more than the eye. The most common drugs used for this purpose
280 mg/dL in persons older than 60. It is now known, are demecarium (Humorsol) and echthiophate (Phospho-
however,that TC levels over 200 mg/dL are associated line iodide).
with significantly higher risk of CAD. Levels of 280
mg/dL or more are considered elevated. Treatment with
Description
diet and medication has proven to successfully lower risk
of heart attackand stroke. Cholinergic drugs usually act in one of two ways.
Elevated cholesterol levels may also result from Some directly mimic the effect of acetylcholine,while
hepatitis, blockage of the bile ducts, disorders of lipid others block the effects of acetylcholinesterase. Acetyl-
metabolism,nephrotic syndrome,inflammation of the cholinesterase is an enzyme that destroys naturally
pancreas,or hypothyroidism. occurring acetylcholine. By blocking the enzyme, the
naturally occurring acetylcholine has a longer action.
Resources
Recommended dosage
BOOKS
Baron,Robert B.,and Warren S. Browner. “Lipid Abnormali-
Cholinergic drugs are available only by prescription.
ties.”In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1998.
They may be available as eye drops,capsules,tablets,or
37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton
injections.
& Lange,1997.
“Laboratory and Reference Guides.”In The Merck Manual of
Diagnosis and Therapy.16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rah- Precautions
way,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,1992.
Sobel,David S.,and Tom Ferguson. The People’s Book of Cholinergic drugs should be avoided when the
Medical Tests.New York:Summit Books,1985. patient has any sort of obstruction in the urinary or diges-
tive tracts,such a a tumor,or severe inflammation which
Rebecca J. Frey
is causing blockage.
They should be used with caution in patients with
asthma,epilepsy,slow heart beat,hyperthyroidism,or
Cholinergic drugs gastric ulcers.
The effects of the cholinergic drugs are to produce
Definition
the same effects as stimulation of the parasympathetic
Cholinergic drugs are medications that produce the nervous system. These effects include slowing of the
same effects as the parasympathetic nervous system. heartbeat,increases in normal secretions including the
794 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sgurd
cigrenilohC
“Congenital myasthenic syndromes:recent advances.”
KEY TERMS Archives of Neurology(February 1999).
Samuel Uretsky,PharmD
Cholinergic—Nerves that are stimulated by acetyl-
choline.
Glaucoma—a disease of the eye marked by
increased pressure within the eyeball that can
result in damage to the optic disk and gradual loss
Chondromalacia patellae
of vision.
Myasthenia gravis—a disease characterized by pro- Definition
gressive weakness and exhaustibility of voluntary
Chondromalacia patellae refers to the progressive
muscles without atrophy or sensory disturbance
erosion of the articular cartilage of the knee joint,that is
and caused by an autoimmune attack on acetyl-
the cartilage underlying the kneecap (patella) that articu-
choline receptors at neuromuscular junctions.
lates with the knee joint.
Parasympathetic nervous system—the part of the
nervous system that contains chiefly cholinergic
Description
fibers, that tends to induce secretion, to increase
the tone and contractility of smooth muscle, and Chondromalacia patellae (CMP), also known as
to slow the heart rate. patello-femoral painsyndrome or patello-femoral stress
syndrome,is a syndrome that causes pain/discomfort at
the front of the knee. It is associated with irritation or
wear on the underside of the kneecap,or patella. In a nor-
digestive acids of the stomach,saliva and tears. For this mal knee,the articular cartilage is smooth and elastic and
reason, patients who already have a problem in one of glides smoothly over the surface of the thighbone, or
these areas,such as a slow heartbeat or stomach ulcers femur when the knee is bent. Erosion of the cartilage
should use these drugs with great caution,since the med- roughens the surface and prevents this smooth action.
ication will make their conditions worse.
CMP is most common in adolescent females,
although older people may also develop it. An average of
Side effects two out of 10,000 people develop this condition,many of
them runners or other athletes.
When used properly,cholinergic drugs will increase
muscle strength in patients with myasthenia gravis. In
eye drop form,they can reduce the intraoccular pressure Causes and symptoms
in glaucoma.
CMP is the result of the normal aging process,
The possible adverse effects of cholinergic drugs are: overuse,injury,or uneven pressures exerted on the knee
joint. In teens,CMP may be caused by uneven growth or
•slow heart beat,possibly leading to cardiac arrest
uneven strength in the thigh muscles. Growth spurts,
•muscle weakness,muscle cramps,and muscle pain
common in teens,may result in a mildly abnormal align-
•convulsions ment of the patella,which increases the angle formed by
•weak breathing,inability to breath the thigh and the patellar tendon (Q-angle). This condi-
tion adds to the damage. Symptoms include pain, nor-
•increased stomach acid and saliva
mally around the kneecap,and a grinding sensation felt
•nausea and vomiting
when extending the leg. The pain may radiate to the back
•dizziness,drowsiness,and headache of the knee,or it may be intermittent and brought on by
squatting,kneeling,going up or down stairs,especially
Resources down,or by repeated bending of the joint.
BOOKS
Beyond the Limits:A Self Portrait of Myasthenia Gravis. Diagnosis
Susanville,CA:Palette-Publishing,March 1994. Diagnosis is established during a physical examina-
PERIODICALS tionperformed by a general practitioner or an orthope-
“Classic Papers in Glaucoma.”Archives of Ophthalmology dist, and is based on frequency of symptoms and con-
(March 2001). firmed by x rays of the knee. The CMP erosion can also
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 795
Chondromalacia
patellae
Prognosis
KEY TERMS
In most teens with CMP,the prognosis is excellent
since the damage is reversible when treatment starts
Arthroscopic knee surgery—Surgery performed to
before the cartilage begins to break down. With proper
examine or repair tissues inside the knee joint
treatment and preventive techniques,teenagers will com-
through a special scope (arthroscope).
plete their growth without permanent damage to the
Femur—The thigh bone. joint. Only about 15% of patients require surgical inter-
vention. Older people may go on to develop osteoarthri-
Isometric exercises—Exercises which strengthen
tisin the knee.
through muscle resistance.
Osteoarthritis—Degenerative joint disease.
Prevention
Quadriceps, hip flexors, hamstrings—Major mus-
cles in the thigh area which affect knee mechanics. Proper exercises are the best preventive measure.
Since tightness of thigh muscles is a risk factor,warming
up before athletic activities is recommended,as well as
participating in a variety of sports rather than just one.
be seen on an MRI,although this type of scan is not rou- Stretching exercises increase flexibility of the quadri-
tinely performed for this purpose. The patient should ceps,hip flexors,and hamstrings. Strengthening exercis-
inform the doctor about any previous injuries to the joint. es such as short arc leg extensions, straight leg raises,
quadriceps isometric exercises,and stationary bicycling
Treatment are also recommended.
Initial treatment may consist of resting the knee
using crutches, along with aspirin,Tylenol, or a non- Resources
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) such as
OTHER
Motrin for seven to 10 days. The person should limit Chondromalacia patellae.<http://my.webmd.com/content/
sports activity until the joint is healed and may use ice asset/adam_disease_chondromalacia_patellae>.
followed by heat to decrease inflammation. When the Chondromalacia Patellae.<http://www.orthoseek.com/articles/
doctor allows the patient to resume sports,a knee brace chondromp.html>.
may be prescribed in the form of a stabilizer with a hole “Major Domains of Complementary & Alternative Medicine.”
at the kneecap. <http://nccam.nih.gov/fcp/classify/>.
Questions and Answers About Knee Problems.<http://www.
Treatment also includes low impact exercises to
cbshealthwatch.com/cx/viewarticle/202777>.
strengthen the quadriceps muscles which help stabilize Questions and Answers About Knee Problems.<http://www.
the knee joint. Physical therapy may be suggested at the nih.gov/niams/healthinfo/kneeprobs/kneeqa.htm>.
start of this program so as to help the patient learn the
correct method of performing the exercises. Barbara J. Mitchell
Approximately 85% of people do well with conserv-
Chorea see Movement disorders
ative CMP treatment. The remainder still have severe
pain and may require arthroscopic surgeryto repair the
tissues inside the knee joint. In more severe cases,open
surgery may be required to realign the kneecap and per-
haps other corrections.
Choriocarcinoma
Alternative treatments
Definition
Physical therapy offers treatments that may help
CMP patients. Aqua therapy has the benefit of exercising A choriocarcinoma is type of cancergerm cell con-
the knee without putting stress on it and it also strength- taining trophoblast cells.
ens the thigh muscles. Biofeedbackcan be used to learn
tensing and relaxing specific muscles to relieve pain.
Description
These techniques have the benefit of no side effects.
Massage therapymight be beneficial as well. Calcium, Choriocarcinomas are cancers that develop from
minerals, and vitamins as part of a balanced diet will germ cells,cells that ordinarily turn into sperm or eggs.
aid healing and help prevent further problems. Choriocarcinomas resemble the cells that surround an
796 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
amonicracoirohC
KEY TERMS
Biopsy—A sample of an organ taken to look for Mole—A mass of abnormal, partially developed tis-
abnormalities. Also, the technique used to take such sues inside the uterus (womb). Moles develop dur-
samples. ing a pregnancy that begins with an abnormal fertil-
ization.
Chemotherapy—The treatment of cancer with
drugs. Ovaries—The female sex organs that make eggs
and female hormones.
Computed tomography (CT)—A special x ray tech-
nique that produces a cross sectional image of the Remission—The disappearance of the symptoms of
organs inside the body. cancer, although all of the cancer cells may not be
gone.
Extragonadal—In a location other than the repro-
ductive organs. Reproductive organs—The group of organs (includ-
ing the testes, ovaries, and uterus) whose purpose is
Germ cell—One of the cells that ordinarily develop
to produce a new individual and continue the
into eggs or sperm (also sperm and eggs).
species.
Gonads—The ovaries or testes.
Testes—The male sex organs that make sperm and
Klinefelter syndrome—A condition caused by extra male hormones.
X chromosome(s) in a male, that results in small
Testicular cancer—A cancer that originates in the
testes and infertility together with increased height,
testes.
decreased facial hair, and sometimes breast
Trophoblast—The tissues that surround an embryo
enlargement.
and attach it to the uterus.
Magnetic resonance imaging—A type of study that
Tumor—A lump made up of abnormal cells.
uses changes induced by magnets to see cells and
tissues inside the body. Uterus—The organ where a child develops (womb).
embryo in the uterus. Most of these cancers form inside widening of the waistline or pain. In the testes,chorio-
the reproductive organs. Some originate in the testes or carcinomas can often be felt as small painless lumps.
ovaries,especially in young adults. Others develop in the Choriocarcinomas that spread to other organs may reveal
uterus after a pregnancy or miscarriage—particularly their presence by bleeding. In the brain,this bleeding can
often after a mole. A few choriocarcinomas arise in sites cause a stroke.
outside the reproductive organs. Such “extragonadal”
tumors are usually found in young adults and are more
common in males. Diagnosis
Choriocarcinomas are one of the most dangerous Choriocarcinomas are usually referred to an
germ cell cancers. Choriocarcinomas usually grow oncologist, a doctor who specializes in cancer treat-
quickly and spread widely. Occasionally, this cancer ment. To diagnose this tumor, the doctor will do a
grows so fast that the original tumor outgrows its blood physical examination and examine the internal
supply and dies,leaving behind only a small scar. organs with x rays or ultrasound studies. Choriocarci-
nomas are not always biopsied before being treated,
because they tend to bleed heavily. Spreading of the
Causes and symptoms
cancer is detected with x rays, ultrasound studies,
Choriocarcinomas result from genetic damage to a computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance
germ cell. Males with Klinefelter syndromeare espe- imaging(MRI) scans.
cially likely to develop extragonadal germ cell tumors.
Most choriocarcinomas make human chorionic
The symptoms of a choriocarcinoma vary,depend- gonadotropin (hCG), a hormone normally found only
ing on where the tumor originates and where it spreads. during pregnancy. The presence of hCG in the blood can
In the uterus, the most common symptom is bleeding. help diagnose this cancer and monitor the success of
Cancers in the ovary often have only subtle signs such as treatment.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 797
Choriocarcinoma
Treatment “The Male Genital Tract.”In Robbins Pathologic Basis of Dis-
ease,6th ed. Ed. Ramzi S. Cotran,Vinay Kumar,and
Choriocarcinomas are usually treated by surgical Tucker Collins. Philadelphia:W.B. Saunders,1999.
removal of the tumor and chemotherapy. Radiation is Thigpen,James Tate. “Ovaries and Fallopian Tubes.”In Clini-
occasionally used,particularly for tumors in the brain. cal Oncology,2nd ed. Ed. Martin D. Abeloff,et al.
Philadelphia:Churchill Livingstone,2000.
Alternative treatment PERIODICALS
Newlands,Edward S.,Fernando J. Paradinas,and Rosemary A.
Complementary treatments can decrease stress,
Fisher. “Current Therapeutic Issues in Gynecologic Can-
reduce the side effects of cancer treatment, and help
cer. Recent Advances in Gestational Trophoblastic Dis-
patients feel more in control. For instance,some people ease.”Hematology/Oncology Clinics of North America
find activities such as yoga, massage, music therapy, 13,no. 1 (Feb. 1999):225-44.
meditation,prayer,or mild physical exercisehelpful.
OTHER
“Chemotherapy and You:A Guide to Self-help During Cancer
Prognosis Treatment.”CancerNet.June 1999. 5 Apr. 2001 <http://
cancernet.nci.nih.gov./peb/chemo_you/index.htm>.
The prognosis for choriocarcinomas in the uterus is
“Extragonadal Germ Cell Tumors.”CancerNet.Aug. 2000. 27
very good. Although these tumors have often spread
Apr. 2001 <http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/pdq.html>.
throughout the body,chemotherapy results in a cure or “Ovarian Germ Cell Tumor.”CancerNet.Feb. 2001. 27 Apr.
remission in at least 80–90% of cases. Women who have 2001 <http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/pdq.html>.
had choriocarcinomas often go on to have normal preg-
nancies and deliveries. Anna Rovid Spickler,D.V.M.,Ph.D.
Choriocarcinomas in other sites have a poorer prog-
Chorionic gonadotropin test see Human
nosis. These tumors tend to spread quickly and don’t
always respond well to chemotherapy. Although treat- chorionic gonadotropin pregnancy test
ment can be effective,the outcome usually depends on
how widely the cancer is dispersed. Generally,the prog-
nosis is worse if the cancer can be found in the liver or
brain, if hCG levels are high, or if the original tumor
developed outside the gonads. Five-year survival with
Chorionic villus sampling
testicular cancers can range from 92% for tumors that
have spread only to the lungs to 48% to tumors that have Definition
spread to other internal organs.
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS), also known as
chorionic villus biopsy, is a prenatal test that can detect
Prevention genetic and chromosomal abnormalities of an unborn baby.
There is no known means of prevention. However,
early detection of the symptoms and prompt medical Purpose
treatment can improve the odds of survival.
Chorionic villus sampling is performed on pregnant
women who are at risk for carrying a fetus with a genet-
Resources
ic or chromosomal defect. Although it carries a slightly
BOOKS higher risk,CVS may be used in place of amniocentesis
Baker,Vicki V. “Gestational Trophoblastic Disease.”In Clini- for women who have one or more of the following risk
cal Oncology,2nd ed. Ed. Martin D. Abeloff,et al. factors:
Philadelphia:Churchhill Livingstone,2000.
•Women age 35 and older. The chance of having a child
Crum,Christopher P. “The Female Genital Tract.”In Robbins
with Down syndromeincreases with maternal age. For
Pathologic Basis of Disease,6th ed. Ed. Ramzi S. Cotran,
instance,the chance of having a baby with Down syn-
Vinay Kumar,and Tucker Collins. Philadelphia:W.B.
drome is one in 378 for a 35-year-old woman and
Saunders,1999.
Small,Eric J.,and Frank M. Torti. “The Testes.”In Clinical increases to one in 30 for a 45-year-old woman.
Oncology,2nd ed. Ed. Martin D. Abeloff,et al. Philadel- •A history of miscarriages or children born with birth
phia:Churchhill Livingstone,2000.
defects.
Smithson,William A. “Gonadal and Germ Cell Neoplasms.”In
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics,16th ed. Ed. Richard E. •A family history of genetic disease. Prenatal genetic
Behrman,et al. Philadelphia:W.B. Saunders,2000. testingis recommended if either the mother or father of
798 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gnilpmas
sulliv
cinoirohC
the unborn baby has a family history of genetic disease Chorionic villus sampling is best performed
or is known to be a carrier of a genetic disease. between 10 and 12 weeks of pregnancy. The procedure is
performed either through the vagina and the cervix
(transcervically) or through the abdomen (transabdomi-
Precautions
nally) depending upon the preferences of the patient or
Chorionic villus sampling is not recommended for the doctor. In some cases, the location of the placenta
women who have vaginal bleeding or spotting during the dictates which method the doctor uses. Both methods are
pregnancy. It is not typically recommended for women equally safe and effective. Following the preparation
who have Rh sensitization from a previous pregnancy. time, both procedures take only about five minutes.
Women undergoing chorionic villus sampling may expe-
rience no painat all or feel cramping or pinching. Occa-
Description
sionally, a second sampling procedure must be per-
Chorionic villus sampling has been in use since the formed if insufficient villus material was obtained.
1980s. This prenatal testing procedure involves taking a
sample of the chorion frondosum—that part of the chori- For the transcervical procedure,the woman lies on
onic membrane containing the villi—for laboratory an examining table on her back with her feet in stirrups.
analysis. The chorionic membrane is the outer sac which The woman’s vaginal area is thoroughly cleansed with an
surrounds the developing fetus. Chorionic villi are antiseptic,a sterile speculum is inserted into her vagina
microscopic,finger-like projections that emerge from the and opened,and the cervix is cleansed with an antiseptic.
chorionic membrane and eventually form the placenta. Using ultrasound (a device which uses sound waves to
The cells that make up the chorionic villi are of fetal ori- visualize internal organs) as a guide,the doctor inserts a
gin so laboratory analysis can identify any genetic,chro- thin,plastic tube called a catheter through the cervix and
mosomal,or biochemical diseases of the fetus. into the uterus. The passage of the catheter through the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 799
Chorionic
villus
sampling
Ultrasound transducer
Bladder
Chorionic villi
Amniotic fluid
Fetus (8-10 weeks)
Catheter
Vagina
Uterine cavity
Chorionic villus sampling is performed on pregnant women who are at risk for carrying a fetus with a genetic or chromoso-
mal defect.This procedure can be performed through the vagina and the cervix (transcervically) or through the abdomen
(transabdominally).In the transcervical procedure,as depicted above,the physician uses ultrasound to help guide a catheter
through the cervix into the uterus.By applying suction from the syringe attached to the other end of the catheter,a small
sample of the chorionic villi are obtained.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
oratory,the sample is examined under the microscope and
KEY TERMS any contaminating cells or material is carefully removed.
The villi can be analyzed immediately,or incubated for a
Chorionic villi—Microscopic, finger-like projec- day or more to allow for cell division. The cells are
tions that emerge from the outer sac which sur- stopped in the midst of cell division and spread onto a
rounds the developing baby. Chorionic villi are of microscope slide. Cells with clearly separated chromo-
fetal origin and eventually form the placenta. somes are photographed so that the type and number of
chromosomes can be analyzed. Chromosomes are strings
Chromosomes—Human cells carry DNA in tightly
of DNA which have been tightly compressed. Humans
compressed rod-like structures called chromo-
have 23 pairs of chromosomes including the sex chromo-
somes. Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes
somes. Rearrangements of the chromosomes or the pres-
including the sex chromosomes.
ence of additional or fewer chromosomes can be identified
Down syndrome—A chromosomal disorder by examination of the photograph. Down syndrome,for
caused by an extra copy or a rearrangement of instance,is caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21. In
chromosome 21. Children with Down syndrome addition to the chromosomal analysis,specialized tests can
have varying degrees of mental retardation and be performed as needed to look for specific diseases such
may have heart defects. as Tay-Sachs disease. Depending upon which tests are
Fetus—Term for an unborn baby after the eighth performed,results may be available as early as two days or
week of pregnancy. Prior to seven weeks, it is up to eight days after the procedure.
called an embryo. Chorionic villus sampling costs between $1,200 and
Rh sensitization—A woman with a negative blood $1,800. Insurance coverage for this test may vary.
type (Rh negative) who has produced antibodies
against her fetus with a positive blood type (Rh
Alternate procedures
positive). The mother’s body considered the fetal
blood cells a foreign object and mounted an There are alternate procedures for diagnosing genet-
immune attack on it. ic and chromosomal disorders of the fetus. Amniocente-
Ultrasound—A safe, painless procedure which sis is commonly used and involves inserting a needle
uses sound waves to visualize internal organs. A through the pregnant woman’s abdomen to obtain a sam-
wand that transmits and receives the sound waves ple of amniotic fluid. Amniocentesis is usually per-
is moved over the woman’s abdomen and internal formed in the second trimester at approximately 16
organs can be seen on a video screen. weeks gestation and the laboratory analysis may take two
to three weeks. The two advantages of chorionic villus
sampling are that it is performed during the first trimester
and the results are available in about one week. However,
as of 1997,amniocentesis is being performed in the first
cervix may cause cramping. The doctor carefully watch-
trimester,but this is still very rare. The risk of miscar-
es the image produced by the ultrasound and advances
riageafter amniocentesis is 0.5–1% (one to two women
the catheter to the chorionic villi. By applying suction
out of 200) which is lower than that for chorionic villus
from the syringe attached to the other end of the catheter,
sampling (1–3%).
a small sample of the chorionic villi are obtained. A
cramping or pinching feeling may be felt as the sample is A noninvasive alternative is the maternal blood test
being taken. The catheter is then easily withdrawn. called triple marker screening or multiple marker screen-
ing. A sample of the pregnant woman’s blood is analyzed
For the transabdominal method,the woman lies on
for three different markers: alphafetoprotein (AFP),
her back on an examining table. Ultrasound enables the
human chorionic gonadotropin,and unconjugated estriol.
doctor to locate the placenta. The specific area on the
The levels of these three markers in the mother’s blood
woman’s abdomen is cleansed thoroughly with an anti-
can identify unborn babies who are at risk for certain
septic and a local anesthetic may be injected to numb the
genetic or chromosomal defects. This is a screening test
area. With ultrasound guidance,a long needle is inserted
which determines the chance that the fetus has the defect,
through the woman’s abdominal wall,through the uterine
but it can not diagnose defects. A negative test result
wall and to the chorionic villi. The sample is obtained by
does not necessarily mean the unborn baby does not have
applying suction from the syringe.
a birth defect. For instance,this screening test can only
The chorionic villus sample is immediately placed predict 60–70% of the fetuses with Down syndrome.
into nutrient medium and sent to the laboratory. At the lab- Pregnant women who have a positive triple marker
800 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gnilpmas
sulliv
cinoirohC
screen are encouraged to undergo a diagnostic test,such fibrosis. Gross rearrangements of the chromosomes and
as amniocentesis (by the time an AFP is done,it is too chromosome additions or losses are detected.
late to perform a CVS).
Resources
Preparation BOOKS
Eisenberg,E.,et. al. What to Expect When You’re Expecting.
Prior to the chorionic villus sampling procedure the
New York:Workman Publishing,1996.
woman needs to drink fluids and refrain from urinating
to ensure her bladder is full. These preparations create a PERIODICALS
better ultrasound picture. Froster,U. G.,et. al. “Limb Defects and Chorionic Villus Sam-
pling:Results from an International Registry,1992–94.”
Lancet347 (1996):489-94.
Aftercare
Sundberg,K.,et. al. “Randomised Study of Risk of Fetal Loss
It is generally recommended that women undergoing Related to Early Amniocentesis Versus Chorionic Villus
chorionic villus sampling have someone drive them Sampling.”Lancet350 (1997):697-703.
home and have no plans for the rest of the day. Women ORGANIZATIONS
with Rh negative blood must receive a Rho (D) immune March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275 Mamaroneck
globulin injection following the procedure. Women Ave.,White Plains,NY 10605. (914) 428-7100. <http://
should call their doctor if they experience excessive www.modimes.org>.
bleeding, vaginal discharge, fever, or abdominal pain
OTHER
after the procedure.
Family Internet Page.<http://www.familyinternet.com>.
Belinda Rowland,PhD
Risks
Of women who undergo transcervical chorionic vil-
Choroiditis see Uveitis
lus sampling,one third experience minimal vaginal spot-
Choroiretinitis see Uveitis
ting and 7–10% experience vaginal bleeding. One out of
five women experience cramping following the proce- Chromosome studies see Genetic testing
dure. Two to three women out of 100 (or 2–3%) will mis-
Chronic arthritis of childhood see Juvenile
carry following chorionic villus sampling. The risk of
arthritis
infection is very low. Rupture of the amniotic mem-
branes is a rare complication. Women with Rh negative Chronic constrictive pericarditis see
blood may be at an increased risk for developing Rh
Pericarditis
incompatibility following chorionic villus sampling.
Chronic Epstein-Barr virus see Chronic
There have been reports of limb defects in babies
fatigue syndrome
following chorionic villus sampling. However,in 1996
the World Health Organization reported that the inci-
dence of babies born with limb defects from 138,966
women who had undergone chorionic villus sampling
was the same as for women who had not. Therefore,this
study found no connection between chorionic villus sam- Chronic fatigue syndrome
pling and limb defects.
Definition
Normal results Chronic fatiguesyndrome (CFS) is a condition that
causes extreme tiredness. People with CFS have debili-
No genetic, chromosomal, or biochemical abnor-
tating fatigue that lasts for six months or longer. They
malities were found in the fetal cells. The gender of the
also have many other symptoms. Some of these are pain
fetus will be identified but will be made known to the
in the joints and muscles, headache, and sore throat.
parents only with their approval.
CFS does not have a known cause,but appears to result
from a combination of factors.
Abnormal results
Description
Analysis of the cells from the chorionic villus
enables the detection of over 200 diseases and disorders CFS is the most common name for this disorder,but
such as Down Syndrome,Tay-Sachs disease,and cystic it also has been called chronic fatigue and immune disor-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 801
Chronic
fatigue
syndrome
der (CFIDS), myalgic encephalomyelitis, low natural symptoms caused by several conditions. One theory is
killer cell disease,post-viral syndrome,Epstein-Barr dis- that a microorganism, such as a virus, or a chemical
ease, and Yuppie flu. CFS has so many names because injures the body and damages the immune system,allow-
researchers have been unable to find out exactly what ing dormant viruses to become active. About 90% of all
causes it and because there are many similar,overlapping people have a virus in the herpes family dormant (not
conditions. Reports of a CFS-like syndrome called actively growing or reproducing) in their bodies since
neurasthenia date back to 1869. Later,people with simi- childhood. When these viruses start growing again,the
lar symptoms were said to have fibromyalgia because immune system may overreact and produce chemicals
one of the main symptoms is myalgia, or muscle pain. called cytokines that can cause flu-like symptoms.
Because of the similarity of symptoms,fibromyalgia and Immune abnormalities have been found in studies of
CFS are considered to be overlapping syndromes. people with CFS, although the same abnormalities are
also found in people with allergies, autoimmune dis-
In the early to mid-1980s, there were outbreaks of
eases,cancer,and other disorders.
CFS in some areas of the United States. Doctors found that
many people with CFS had high levels of antibodies to the The role of psychological problems in CFS is very
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV),which causes mononucleosis,in controversial. Because many people with CFS are diag-
their blood. For a while they thought they had found the nosed with depression and other psychiatric disorders,
culprit,but it turned out that many healthy people also had some experts conclude that the symptoms of CFS are
high EBV antibodies. Scientists have also found high levels psychological. However,many people with CFS did not
of other viral antibodies in the blood of people with CFS. have psychological disorders before getting the illness.
These findings have led many scientists to believe that a Many doctors think that patients become depressed or
virus or combination of viruses may trigger CFS. anxious because of the effects of the symptoms of their
CFS. One recent study concluded that depression was the
CFS was sometimes referred to as Yuppie flu because
result of CFS and was not its cause.
it seemed to often affect young,middle-class profession-
als. In fact, CFS can affect people of any gender, age, Having CFS is not just a matter of being tired. Peo-
race,or socioeconomic group. Although anyone can get ple with CFS have severe fatigue that keeps them from
CFS,most patients diagnosed with CFS are 25–45 years performing their normal daily activities. They find it dif-
old,and about 80% of cases are in women. Estimates of ficult or impossible to work, attend school, or even to
how many people are afflicted with CFS vary due to the take part in social activities. They may have sleep distur-
similarity of CFS symptoms to other diseases and the dif- bances that keep them from getting enough rest or they
ficulty in identifying it. The Centers for Disease Control may sleep too much. Many people with CFS feel just as
and Prevention (CDC) has estimated that four to 10 peo- tired after a full night’s sleep as before they went to bed.
ple per 100,000 in the United States have CFS. According When they exercise or try to be active in spite of their
to the CFIDS Foundation, about 500,000 adults in the fatigue,people with CFS experience what some patients
United States (0.3% of the population) have CFS. This call “payback”—debilitating exhaustion that can confine
probably is a low estimate since these figures do not them to bed for days.
include children and are based on the CDC definition of
Other symptoms of CFS include:
CFS,which is very strict for research purposes.
•muscle pain (myalgia)
•joint pain (arthralgia)
Causes and symptoms
•sore throat
There is no single known cause for CFS. Studies
•headache
have pointed to several different conditions that might be
responsible. These include: •feverand chills
•viral infections •tender lymph nodes
•chemical toxins •trouble concentrating
•allergies •memory loss
•immune abnormalities A recent study at Johns Hopkins University found an
abnormality in blood pressure regulation in 22 of 23
•psychological disorders
patients with CFS. This abnormality, called neurally
Although the cause is still controversial,many doc- mediated hypotension, causes a sudden drop in blood
tors and researchers now think that CFS may not be a pressure when a person has been standing,exercising or
single illness. Instead,they think CFS may be a group of exposed to heat for a while. When this occurs,patients
802 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
eugitaf
cinorhC
feel lightheaded and may faint. They often are exhausted
for hours to days after one of these episodes. When treat- KEY TERMS
ed with salt and medications to stabilize blood pressure,
many patients in the study had marked improvements in Arthralgia—Joint pain.
their CFS symptoms.
Cytokines—Proteins produced by certain types of
lymphocytes. They are important controllers of
Diagnosis immune functions.
CFS is diagnosed by evaluating symptoms and elim- Depression—A psychological condition, with
inating other causes of fatigue. Doctors carefully ques- feelings of sadness, sleep disturbance, fatigue, and
tion patients about their symptoms,any other illnesses inability to concentrate.
they have had, and medications they are taking. They
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)—A virus in the herpes
also conduct a physical examination, neurological
family that causes mononucleosis.
examination,and laboratory tests to identify any underly-
Fibromyalgia—A disorder closely related to CFS.
ing disorders or other diseases that cause fatigue. In the
Symptoms include pain, tenderness, and muscle
United States,many doctors use the CDC case definition
stiffness.
to determine if a patient has CFS.
Lymph node—Small immune organs containing
To be diagnosed with CFS,patients must meet both
lymphocytes. They are found in the neck, armpits,
of the following criteria:
groin, and other locations in the body.
•Unexplained continuing or recurring chronic fatigue for
Lymphocytes—White blood cells that are respon-
at least six months that is of new or definite onset,is not
sible for the actions of the immune system.
the result of ongoing exertion, and is not mainly
relieved by rest,and causes occupational,educational, Mononucleosis—A flu-like illness caused by the
social,or personal activities to be greatly reduced. Epstein-Barr virus.
•Four or more of the following symptoms:loss of short- Myalgia—Muscle pain.
term memory or ability to concentrate; sore throat; tender
Myalgic encephalomyelitis—An older name for
lymph nodes; muscle pain; multi-joint pain without
chronic fatigue syndrome; encephalomyelitis refers
swelling or redness; headaches of a new type,pattern,or
to inflammation of the brain and spinal cord.
severity; unrefreshing sleep; and post-exertional malaise
Natural killer (NK) cell—A lymphocyte that acts
(a vague feeling of discomfort or tiredness following
as a primary immune defense against infection.
exercise or other physical or mental activity) lasting more
than 24 hours. These symptoms must have continued or Neurally mediated hypotension—A rapid fall in
recurred during six or more consecutive months of illness blood pressure that causes dizziness, blurred
and must not have started before the fatigue began. vision, and fainting, and is often followed by pro-
longed fatigue.
Treatment Neurasthenia—Nervous exhaustion—a disorder
with symptoms of irritability and weakness, com-
There is no cure for CFS,but many treatments are
monly diagnosed in the late 1800s.
available to help relieve the symptoms. Treatments usual-
ly are individualized to each person’s particular symp-
toms and needs. The first treatment most doctors recom-
mend is a combination of rest,exercise,and a balanced
plan with their doctors,and carefully weigh the benefits and
diet. Prioritizing activities, avoiding overexertion, and
risks of each therapy before making a decision.
resting when needed are key to maintaining existing
energy reserves. A program of moderate exercise helps to
Drugs
keep patients from losing physical conditioning,but too
much exercise can worsen fatigue and other CFS symp- Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs(NSAIDs),
toms. Counseling and stress reductiontechniques also such as ibuprofen and naproxen,may be used to relieve
may help some people with CFS. pain and reduce fever. Another medication that is pre-
scribed to relieve pain and muscle spasms is cyclobenza-
Many medications,nutritional supplements,and herbal
prine (sold as Flexeril).
preparations have been used to treat CFS. While many of
these are unproven, others seem to provide some people Many doctors prescribe low dosages of antidepres-
with relief. People with CFS should discuss their treatment sants for their sedative effects and to relieve symptoms of
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 803
Chronic
fatigue
syndrome
depression. Antianxiety drugs, such as benzodi- the demands of the disorder by carefully following a
azepinesor buspirone may be prescribed for excessive treatment plan combining adequate rest,nutrition,exer-
anxietythat has lasted for at least six months. cise,and other therapies.
Other medications that have been tested or are being
tested for treatment of CFS are: Prevention
•Fludrocortisone (Florinef),a synthetic steroid,which is
Because the cause of CFS is not known,there current-
currently being tested for treatment of people with
ly are no recommendations for preventing the disorder.
CFS. It causes the body to retain salt,thereby increas-
ing blood pressure. It has helped some people with CFS
Resources
who have neurally mediated hypotension.
BOOKS
•Beta-adrenergic blocking drugs,often prescribed for high
Demitrack,Mark A.,and Susan E. Abbey. Chronic Fatigue
blood pressure. Such drugs,including atenolol (Tenoretic,
Syndrome:An Integrative Approach to Evaluation and
Tenormin) and propranolol (Inderal),are sometimes pre-
Treatment.New York:The Guilford Press,1996.
scribed for neurally mediated hypotension.
Fisher,Gregg Charles. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome:A Compre-
•Gamma globulin,which contains human antibodies to a hensive Guide to Symptoms,Treatments,and Solving the
variety of organisms that cause infection. It has been Practical Problems of CFS.New York:Warner Books,
used experimentally to boost immune function in peo- 1997.
Hoffman,Ronald L. Tired All the Time:How to Regain Your
ple with CFS.
Lost Energy.New York:Poseidon Press,1993.
•Ampligen,a drug which stimulates the immune system Johnson,Hillary. Osler’s Web:Inside the Labyrinth of the
and has antiviral activity. In one small study,ampligen Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Epidemic. New York:Crown
improved mental function in people with CFS. Publishers,1996.
PERIODICALS
Alternative treatment Cannon,J. G.,et al. “Interleukin-1 beta,Interleukin-1 Receptor
Antagonist,and Soluble Interleukin-1 Receptor Type II
A variety of nutritional supplements are used for
Secretion in Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.”Journal of Clin-
treatment of CFS. Among these are vitamin C,vitamin
ical Immunology17 (May 1997):253-61.
B 12 ,vitamin A,vitamin E,and various dietary minerals. Houde,Susan Crocker,and Renee Kampfe-Leacher. “Chronic
These supplements may help improve immune and men- Fatigue Syndrome:An Update for Clinicians in Primary
tal functions. Several herbs have been shown to improve Care.”The Nurse Practitioner22 (July 1997):30-40.
immune function and have other beneficial effects. Some Lerner,A. Martin,et al. “Hypothesis:A Unified Theory of the
that are used for CFS are astragalus (Astragalus mem- Cause of Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.”Infectious Diseases
branaceus),echinacea(Echinaceaspp.),garlic (Allium in Clinical Practice6 (1997):239-243.
“New Treatment for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.”Tufts Univer-
sativum),ginseng (Panax ginseng),gingko (Gingko bilo-
sity Diet & Nutrition Letter13 (Feb. 1996):1-2.
ba),evening primrose oil (Oenothera biennis),shiitake
Weiss,Rick. “A Cure for Chronic Fatigue? If New Research
mushroom extract (Lentinus edodes), borage seed oil,
Proves Right,Some Sufferers Have Nothing More than an
and quercetin.
Easy-to-Fix Blood Pressure Problem.”The Nurse Practi-
Many people have enhanced their healing process tioner22 (July 1997):30-40.
for CFS with the use of a treatment program inclusive of
ORGANIZATIONS
one or more alternative therapies. Stressreduction tech-
American Association for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. 7 Van
niques such as biofeedback,meditation,acupuncture,
Buren St.,Albany,NY 12206. (518) 435-1765. <http://
and yogamay help people with sleep disturbances relax
weber.u.washington.edu/~dedra/aacfs1.html>.
and get more rest. They also help some people reduce The CFIDS Association. Community Health Services,P.O.
depression and anxiety caused by CFS. Box 220398,Charlotte,NC 28222-0398. (704) 362-2343.
The National CFS Association. 919 Scott Ave.,Kansas City,
KS 66105. (913) 321-2278.
Prognosis
The National CFIDS Foundation. 103 Aletha Road,Needham,
The course of CFS varies widely for different peo- MA 02192. (781) 449-3535. <http://www.cfidsfoundation.
org>.
ple. Some people get progressively worse over time,
while others gradually improve. Some individuals have
OTHER
periods of illness that alternate with periods of good
“The Facts about Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.”Centers for Dis-
health. While many people with CFS never fully regain ease Control.<http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/cfs/
their health,they find relief from symptoms and adapt to facts1.htm>.
804 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
eugitaf
cinorhC
“Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.”National Institutes of Health.
<http://www.nih.gov>. KEY TERMS
Toni Rizzo
Immunodeficiency—A weakening of the body’s
immune system.
Phagocytic cells—A cell that ingests microorgan-
isms and foreign particles.
Chronic granulomatous
disease
Causes and symptoms
Definition
The genetic defect that causes CGD reduces the
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is an inherit-
amount of hydrogen peroxide and superoxide that white
ed disorder in which white blood cells lose their ability to
blood cells can make. These chemicals are important for
destroy certain bacteria and fungi.
killing bacteria and fungi. Without them the white blood
cells ingest the microorganisms,but can’t kill them. In
Description some cases,the microbes then replicate inside the white
blood cell eventually causing its death.
CGD is an X-linked genetic disease, meaning the
defective gene is carried on the X chromosome (one Symptoms of the disease usually appear by age two.
of the sex chromosomes). Females have two copies of Frequent, recurrent infections of the skin, lungs (e.g.
the X chromosome, whereas males have one X and pneumonia),mouth (e.g. gingivitis),nose,intestines and
one Y. CGD also is a recessive defect meaning that lymph nodes are a hallmark of this disease. Patients may
both copies of the chromosome must have the defect also develop multiple,recurrent liver abscesses and bone
before it can be expressed. Females who have one X infections (osteomyelitis).
chromosome without the defect do not get this dis-
ease. Males,since they only have one X chromosome, Diagnosis
get the disease if the defect is present. Thus, CGD
Diagnosis is made based on the observation of a pat-
affects mostly males.
tern of recurrent infections. Blood tests of lymphocyte
CGD is an immunodeficiency disorder. Patients and antibody functions will be normal. Tests of phago-
with immunodeficiency disorders suffer frequent infec- cytic cells will show normal ingestion, but a greatly
tions. This happens because part of their immune system decreased ability to kill bacteria.
isn’t working properly and the infectious microorgan-
isms are not killed as rapidly as is normal. In CGD there
Treatment
is a defect in the ability of the white blood cells to kill
bacteria and fungi. The white blood cells affected are Early,aggressive treatment of all infections is criti-
phagocytic cells. They are part of the non-specific cal to the successful management of CGD. Patients are
immune system and move via the blood to all parts of the treated with antibioticsand immune serum. Antibiotics
body where they ingest and destroy microbes. Phagocyt- are used at the first sign of infection. Immune serum is a
ic cells are the first line of defense against microorgan- source of antibodies that help fight infections. Interferon
isms. In this disease, the decreased ability to kill gamma is an experimental treatment for CGD that has
microbes that they have ingested leads to a failure to shown promising results. There is no cure for the under-
effectively combat infectious diseases. Patients with lying cause of chronic granulomatous disease
CGD are subject to certain types of recurring infection,
especially those of the skin, lungs, mouth, nose, Prognosis
intestines,and lymph nodes. With the exception of the
Although antibiotics can treat most infections and
lymph nodes,all of these areas are considered external
may help prevent others, premature death may result,
tissues that come into contact with microorganisms from
typically due to repeated lung infections.
the environment. The lymph system drains all areas of
the body to eliminate destroyed microorganisms and to
Prevention
assist the immune system in attacking microorganisms.
Infections occur in the lymph nodes as a consequence of Since CGD is a hereditary disorder, it cannot cur-
the normal draining function. rently be prevented. Patients and their families may ben-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 805
Chronic
granulomatous
disease
efit from genetic counseling. Preventive (prophylactic) ed. The four most common causes of chronic kidney fail-
antibiotics may help keep some infections from occur- ure include:
ring, and good hygiene, especially rigorous skin and
•Diabetes. Diabetes mellitus(DM),both insulin depen-
mouth care, can help prevent infections in these areas.
dant (IDDM) and non-insulin dependant (NIDDM),
Avoiding crowds or other people who have infections are
occurs when the body cannot produce and/or use
also effective preventive measures. insulin,the hormone necessary for the body to process
glucose. Long-term diabetes may cause the glomeruli,
Resources the filtering units located in the nephrons of the kid-
BOOKS neys,to gradually lose functioning.
Abbas,Abul K.,Andrew H. Lichtman,and Jordan S. Pober.
•Glomerulonephritis. Glomerulonephritis is a chronic
Cellular and Molecular Immunology.3rd ed. Philadel-
inflammation of the glomeruli,or filtering units of the
phia. W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
kidney. Certain types of glomerulonephritis are treat-
Professional Guide to Diseases.5th ed. Springhouse,PA:
able,and may only cause a temporary disruption of kid-
Springhouse Corporation,1995.
ney functioning.
ORGANIZATIONS
•Hypertension. High blood pressure is unique in that it
Chronic Granulomatous Disease Association. 2616 Monterey
is both a cause and a major symptom of kidney failure.
Road,San Marino,CA 91108-1646. (818) 441-4118.
National Organization for Rare Disorders. P.O. Box 8923,New The kidneys can become stressed and ultimately sustain
Fairfield,CT 06812-8923. (800) 999-6673. <http://www. permanent damage from blood pushing through them at
rarediseases.org>. an excessive level of pressure over a long period of time.
John T. Lohr,PhD •Polycystic kidney disease. Polycystic kidney disease is
an inherited disorder that causes cysts to be formed on
the nephrons,or functioning units,of the kidneys. The
cysts hamper the regular functioning of the kidney.
Other possible causes of chronic kidney failure
Chronic kidney failure include kidney cancer, obstructions such as kidney
stones, pyelonephritis, reflux nephropathy, systemic
Definition
lupus erythematosus,amyloidosis,sickle cell anemia,
Chronic kidney failure occurs when disease or disor- Alport syndrome,and oxalosis.
der damages the kidneys so that they are no longer capa-
Initially,symptoms of chronic kidney failure devel-
ble of adequately removing fluids and wastes from the
op slowly. Even individuals with mild to moderate kid-
body or of maintaining the proper level of certain kidney-
ney failure may show few symptoms in spite of increased
regulated chemicals in the bloodstream.
urea in their blood. Among the symptoms that may be
present at this point are frequent urination during the
Description night and high blood pressure.
Chronic kidney failure,also known as chronic renal
Most symptoms of chronic kidney failure are not
failure, affects over 250,000 Americans annually. It is
apparent until kidney disease has progressed significant-
caused by a number of diseases and inherited disorders,
ly. Common symptoms include:
but the progression of chronic kidney failure is always the
•Anemia. The kidneys are responsible for the production
same. The kidneys,which serve as the body’s natural fil-
of erythropoietin (EPO),a hormone which stimulates red
tration system,gradually lose their ability to remove flu-
blood cell production. If kidney disease causes shrinking
ids and waste products (urea) from the bloodstream. They
of the kidney,this red cell production is hampered.
also fail to regulate certain chemicals in the bloodstream,
and deposit protein into the urine. Chronic kidney failure •Bad breath or a bad taste in mouth. Urea,or waste prod-
is irreversible, and will eventually lead to total kidney ucts,in the saliva may cause an ammonia-like taste in
failure,also known as end-stage renal disease (ESRD). the mouth.
Without proper treatment intervention to remove wastes
•Bone and joint problems. The kidneys produce vitamin
and fluids from the bloodstream,ESRD is fatal.
D,which aids in the absorption of calcium and keeps
bones strong. For patients with kidney failure, bones
Causes and symptoms
may become brittle,and in the case of children,normal
Kidney failure is triggered by disease or a hereditary growth may be stunted. Joint painmay also occur as a
disorder in the kidneys. Both kidneys are typically affect- result of unchecked phosphate levels in the blood.
806 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
eruliaf
yendik
cinorhC
•Edema. Puffiness or swelling around the eyes, arms,
hands,and feet. KEY TERMS
•Frequent urination.
End-stage renal disease (ESRD)—Total kidney fail-
•Foamy or bloody urine. Protein in the urine may cause
ure; chronic kidney failure is diagnosed as ESRD
it to foam significantly. Blood in the urine may indicate
when kidney function falls to 5–10% of capacity.
bleeding from diseased or obstructed kidneys,bladder,
or ureters. Nephrotic syndrome—Characterized by protein
loss in the urine, low protein levels in the blood,
•Headaches. High blood pressure may trigger headaches.
and fluid retention.
•Hypertension,or high blood pressure. The retention of
Ureters—The two ducts that pass urine from each
fluids and wastes causes blood volume to increase,
kidney to the bladder.
which in turn,causes blood pressure to rise.
•Increased fatigue. Toxic substances in the blood and the
presence of anemia may cause feelings of exhaustion.
•Itching. Phosphorus,which is typically eliminated in Hemodialysis
the urine,accumulates in the blood of patients with kid-
Hemodialysis is the most frequently prescribed type
ney failure. This heightened phosphorus level may
of dialysis treatment in the United States. Most
cause itching of the skin.
hemodialysis patients require treatment three times a
•Lower back pain. Pain where the kidneys are located,in week,for an average of three to four hours per dialysis
the small of the back below the ribs. “run”depending on the type of dialyzer used and their
current physical condition. The treatment involves circu-
•Nausea,loss of appetite,and vomiting. Urea in the gas-
lating the patient’s blood outside of the body through an
tric juices may cause upset stomach. This can lead to
extracorporeal circuit (ECC), or dialysis circuit. The
malnutritionand weight loss.
dialysis circuit consists of plastic blood tubing, a two-
compartment filter known as a dialyzer,or artificial kid-
Diagnosis
ney,and a dialysis machine that monitors and maintains
blood flow and administers dialysate, a chemical bath
Kidney failure is typically diagnosed and treated by a
used to draw waste products out of the blood. The
nephrologist,a doctor that specializes in treating the kid-
patient’s blood leaves and enters the body through two
neys. The patient that is suspected of having chronic kid-
needles inserted into the patient’s vein,called an access
ney failure will undergo an extensive blood work-up. A
site,and is pushed through the blood compartment of the
blood test will assess the levels of creatinine,blood urea
dialyzer. Once inside of the dialyzer,excess fluids and
nitrogen (BUN),uric acid,phosphate,sodium,and potas-
toxins are pulled out of the bloodstream and into the
sium in the blood. Urine samples will also be collected,
dialysate compartment,where they are carried out of the
usually over a 24-hour period,to assess protein loss.
body. At the same time,electrolytes and other chemicals
Uncovering the cause of kidney failure is critical to
in the dialysate solution move from the dialysate into the
proper treatment. A full assessment of the kidneys is nec-
bloodstream. The purified,chemically-balanced blood is
essary to determine if the underlying disease is treatable
then returned to the body.
and if the kidney failure is chronic or acute. An x ray,
MRI, computed tomography scan, ultrasound, renal
Peritoneal dialysis
biopsy, and/or arteriogram of the kidneys may be
employed to determine the cause of kidney failure and In peritoneal dialysis (PD),the patient’s peritoneum,
level of remaining kidney function. X rays and ultra- or lining of the abdomen,acts as a blood filter. A catheter
sound of the bladder and/or ureters may also be taken. is surgically inserted into the patient’s abdomen. During
treatment,the catheter is used to fill the abdominal cavity
with dialysate. Waste products and excess fluids move
Treatment
from the patient’s bloodstream into the dialysate solu-
Chronic kidney failure is an irreversible condition. tion. After a waiting period of six to 24 hours,depending
Hemodialysis,peritoneal dialysis,or kidney transplan- on the treatment method used,the waste-filled dialysate
tationmust be employed to replace the lost function of is drained from the abdomen, and replaced with clean
the kidneys. In addition,dietary changes and treatment to dialysate. There are three types of peritoneal dialysis,
relieve specific symptoms such as anemia and high blood which vary by treatment time and administration
pressure are critical to the treatment process. method: Continuous Ambulatory Peritoneal Dialysis
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 807
Chronic
kidney
failure
(CAPD),Continuous Cyclic Peritoneal Dialysis (CCPD), ESRD have a shortened lifespan. According to the United
and Intermittent Peritoneal Dialysis (IPD). States Renal Data System (USRDS), the lifespan of an
ESRD patient is 18–47% of the lifespan of the age-sex-race
Kidney transplantation matched general population. ESRD patients on dialysis
have a lifespan that is 16–37% of the general population.
Kidney transplantation involves surgically attaching
The demand for kidneys to transplant continues to
a functioning kidney,or graft,from a brain dead organ
exceed supply. In 1996,over 34,000 Americans were on
donor (a cadaver transplant),or from a living donor,to a
the UNOS waiting list for a kidney transplant,but only
patient with ESRD. Patients with chronic renal disease
11,330 living donor and cadaver transplants were actual-
who need a transplant and don’t have a living donor reg-
ly performed. Cadaver kidney transplants have a 50%
ister with UNOS (United Network for Organ Sharing),
chance of functioning nine years,and living donor kid-
the federal organ procurement agency,to be placed on a
neys that have two matching antigen pairs have a 50%
waiting list for a cadaver kidney transplant. Kidney avail-
chance of functioning for 24 years. However,some trans-
ability is based on the patient’s health status. When the
plant grafts have functioned for over 30 years.
new kidney is transplanted, the patient’s existing, dis-
eased kidneys may or may not be removed,depending on
Resources
the circumstances surrounding the kidney failure. A regi-
men of immunosuppressive,or anti-rejection medication, BOOKS
is required after transplantation surgery. Bock,G. H.,E. J. Ruley,and M. P. Moore. A Parent’s Guide to
Kidney Disorders.Minneapolis:University of Minnesota
Press,1993.
Dietary management
Brenner,Barry M.,and Floyd C. Rector Jr.,eds. The Kidney.
A diet low in sodium,potassium,and phosphorous, Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1991.
three substances that the kidneys regulate,is critical in Cameron,J. S. Kidney Failure:The Facts.New York:Oxford
managing kidney disease. Other dietary restrictions,such Univ. Press,1996.
as a reduction in protein,may be prescribed depending Ross,Linda M.,ed. Kidney and Urinary Tract Diseases and
Disorders Sourcebook.Vol. 21. Health Reference Series.
on the cause of kidney failure and the type of dialysis
Detroit:Omnigraphics,1997.
treatment employed. Patients with chronic kidney failure
U.S. Renal Data System. USRDS 1997 Annual Data Report.
also need to limit their fluid intake.
Bethesda,MD:The National Institutes of Health,National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases,
Medications and dietary supplements 1996.
Kidney failure patients with hypertension typically PERIODICALS
take medication to control their high blood pressure. Friedman,Elia A. “End-stage Renal Disease Therapy:An
Epoetin alfa,or EPO (Epogen),a hormone therapy,and American Success Story.”Journal of the American Med-
intravenous or oral iron supplements are used to manage ical Association275 (Apr. 1996):1118-22.
Taylor,Judy H. “End-stage Renal Disease in Children:Diagno-
anemia. A multivitamin may be prescribed to replace vit-
sis,Management,and Interventions.”Pediatric Nursing
aminslost during dialysis treatments. Vitamin D,which
22 (Nov./Dec. 1996):481-92.
promotes the absorption of calcium,along with calcium
supplements,may also be prescribed. ORGANIZATIONS
American Association of Kidney Patients (AAKP). 100 S. Ash-
Since 1973,Medicare has picked up 80% of ESRD
ley Drive,Suite 280,Tampa,FL 33602. (800) 749-2257.
treatment costs,including the costs of dialysis and trans-
<http://www.aakp.org>.
plantation and of some medications. To qualify for bene-
American Kidney Fund (AKF). Suite 1010,6110 Executive
fits, a patient must be insured or eligible for benefits Boulevard,Rockville,MD 20852. (800) 638-8299.
under Social Security,or be a spouse or child of an eligi- <http://www.arbon.com/kidney>.
ble American. Private insurance and state Medicaid pro- National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Dis-
grams often cover the remaining 20% of treatment costs. eases (NIDDK). Building 31,Room 9A04,31 Center
Drive,MSC 2560,Bethesda,MD 208792-2560. (301)
496-3583. <http://www.niddk.nih.gov>.
Prognosis National Kidney Foundation. 30 East 33rd St.,New York,NY
10016. (800) 622-9010. <http://www.kidney.org>.
Early diagnosis and treatment of kidney failure is criti-
United States Renal Data System (USRDS). The University of
cal to improving length and quality of life in chronic kidney
Michigan,315 W. Huron,Suite 240,Ann Arbor,MI 48103.
failure patients. Patient outcome varies by the cause of
(734) 998-6611. <http://www.med.umich.edu/usrds>.
chronic kidney failure and the method chosen to treat it.
Overall, patients with chronic kidney disease leading to Paula Anne Ford-Martin
808 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
eruliaf
yendik
cinorhC
Chronic leukemias see Leukemias, chronic lung called elastin which is important for maintaining the
structure of the walls of the alveoli,the terminal small air
sacs of the respiratory system. As the walls of the alveoli
rupture, the number of alveoli is reduced and many of
those remaining are enlarged, making the lungs of the
Chronic obstructive lung patient with emphysema less elastic and overinflated.
disease Due to the higher pressure inside the chest that must be
developed to force air out of the less-elastic lungs, the
Definition bronchioles, small air tubes of the respiratory system,
tend to collapse during exhalation. Stale air gets trapped
Chronic obstructive lung disease, also known as
in the air sacs and fresh air cannot be brought in.
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),is a gen-
eral term for a group of conditions in which there is per-
sistent difficulty in expelling (or exhaling) air from the Causes and symptoms
lungs. COPD commonly refers to two related,progres-
sive diseases of the respiratory system,chronic bronchi- There are several important risk factors for COPD:
tis and emphysema. Because smoking is the major •Lifestyle. Cigarette smoking is by far the most important
cause of both diseases,chronic bronchitis and emphyse- risk factor for COPD (80% of all cases). Cigar and pipe
ma often occur together in the same patient. smoking can also cause COPD. Air pollution and indus-
trial dusts and fumes are other important risk factors.
Description
•Age. Chronic bronchitis is more common in people
COPD is one of the fastest-growing health prob- over 40 years old; emphysema occurs more often in
lems. Nearly 16 million people in the United States,14 people 65 years of age and older.
million with chronic bronchitis and two million with
•Socioeconomic class. COPD-related deaths are about
emphysema, suffer from COPD. COPD is responsible
twice as high among unskilled and semi-skilled labor-
for more than 96,000 deaths annually, making it the
ers as among professionals.
fourth leading cause of death. Although COPD is more
common in men than women,the increase in incidence •Family clustering. It is thought that heredity predispos-
of smoking among women since World War II has pro- es people in certain families to the development of
duced an increase in deaths from COPD in women. COPD when other causes,such as smoking and air pol-
COPD has a large economic impact on the healthcare lution,are present.
system and a destructive impact on the lives of patients
•Lung infections. Lung infections make all forms of
and their families. Quality of life for a person with
COPD worse.
COPD decreases as the disease progresses.
In the general population,emphysema usually devel-
ops in older individuals with a long smoking history. How-
Chronic bronchitis
ever,there is also a form of emphysema that runs in fami-
In chronic bronchitis,chronic inflammation caused lies. People with this type of emphysema have a hereditary
by cigarette smoking results in a narrowing of the open- deficiency of a blood component, an enzyme inhibitor
ings in the bronchi,the large air tubes of the respiratory called alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT). This type of emphysema
system,and interferes with the flow of air. Inflammation is sometimes called “early onset emphysema”because it
also causes the glands that line the bronchi to produce can appear when a person is as young as 30 or 40 years
excessive amounts of mucus,further narrowing the air- old. It is estimated that there are between 75,000 and
ways and blocking airflow. The result is often a chronic 150,000 Americans who were born with AAT-deficiency.
coughthat produces sputum (mainly mucus) and short- Of this group,emphysema afflicts an estimated 20,000-
ness of breath. Cigarette smoke also damages the cilia, 40,000 people (1–3% of all cases of emphysema). The risk
small hair-like projections that move bacteria and foreign of developing emphysema for an AAT-deficient individual
particles out of the lungs,increasing the risk of infections. who also smokes is much greater than for others.
The first symptoms of chronic bronchitis are cough
Emphysema
and mucus production. These symptoms resemble a chest
Emphysema is a disease in which cigarette smoke cold that lingers on for weeks. Later,shortness of breath
causes an overproduction of the enzyme elastase,one of develops. Cough, sputum production, and shortness of
the immune system’s infection-fighting biochemicals. breath may become worse if a person develops a lung
This results in irreversible destruction of a protein in the infection. A person with chronic bronchitis may later
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 809
Chronic
obstructive
lung
disease
develop emphysema as well. In emphysema,shortness of Blood gas levels
breath on exertion is the predominant early symptom.
Blood may be drawn from an artery (more painful
Coughing is usually minor and there is little sputum. As
than drawing blood from a vein) to determine the amount
the disease progresses, the shortness of breath occurs
of oxygen and carbon dioxide present. Low oxygen and
with less exertion,and eventually may be present even
high carbon dioxide levels are often indicative of chronic
when at rest. At this point, a sputum-producing cough
bronchitis,but not always of emphysema.
may also occur. Either chronic bronchitis or emphysema
may lead to respiratory failure—a condition in which
Tests for cause of infection
there occurs a dangerously low level of oxygen or a seri-
ous excess of carbon dioxide in the blood. If infection is present,blood and sputum tests may
be done to determine the cause of infection.
Diagnosis
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
The first step in diagnosing COPD is a good medical
evaluation, including a medical history and a physical Many patients with lung disease also develop heart
examinationof the chest using a stethoscope. In addition, problems. The ECG identifies signs of heart disease.
the doctor may request one or more of the following tests:
Treatment
Pulmonary function test
The precise nature of the patient’s condition will
Using a spirometer,an instrument that measures the air
determine the type of treatment prescribed for COPD.
taken into and exhaled from the lungs,the doctor will deter-
With a program of complete respiratory care,disability
mine two important values:(1) vital capacity (VC),the largest
can be minimized,acute episodes prevented,hospitaliza-
amount of air expelled after the deepest inhalation,and (2)
tions reduced, and some early deaths avoided. On the
forced expiratory volume (FEV1),the maximum amount of
other hand, no treatment has been shown to slow the
air expired in one second. The pulmonary function testcan
progress of the disease,and only oxygen therapy increas-
be performed in the doctor’s office,but is expensive.
es survival rate.
Chest x ray
Drugs
Chest x rays can detect only about half of the cases of
emphysema. Chest x rays are rarely useful for diagnosing Medications frequently prescribed for COPD
chronic bronchitis. patients include:
810 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
gnul
evitcurtsbo
cinorhC
A
B
C
D
A.lung cancer.B.pneumonia.C.emphysema.D.phlegm from chronic bronchitis.(Illustration by Argosy, Inc.)
•Bronchodilators. These agents open narrowed airways
and offer significant symptomatic relief for many,but KEY TERMS
not all, people with COPD. There are three types of
bronchodilators:Beta2 agonists,anticholinergic agents, Alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT)—A blood component
and theophylline and its derivatives. Depending on the that breaks down infection-fighting enzymes such
specific drug,a bronchodilator may be inhaled,inject- as elastase.
ed,or taken orally.
Alveoli—Terminal air sacs of the respiratory sys-
•Corticosteroids. Corticosteroids, usually inhaled, tem, where gas (oxygen and carbon dioxide)
block inflammation and are most useful for patients exchange occurs.
with chronic bronchitis with or without emphysema.
Bronchi—Large air tubes of the respiratory system.
Steroids are generally not useful in patients who have
emphysema. Bronchioles—Small air tubes of the respiratory
system.
•Oxygen replacement. Eventually, patients with low
blood oxygen levels may need to rely on supplemental Bronchodilators—Drugs that open wider the
oxygen from portable or stationary tanks. bronchial tubes of the respiratory system.
•Antibiotics. Antibiotics are frequently given at the first Corticosteroids—A group of hormones that are
sign of a respiratory infection,such as increased spu- used as drugs to block inflammation.
tum production or a change in color of sputum from Forced expiratory volume (FEV1)—The maximum
clear to yellow or green. amount of air expired in one second.
•Vaccines. To prevent pulmonary infection from viruses Spirometer—An instrument used by a doctor to
and bacteria,people with COPD should be vaccinated perform a breathing test.
against influenzaeach year at least six weeks before
Vital capacity (VC)—The largest amount of air
flu season and have a one-time pneumococcal (pneu-
expelled after one’s deepest inhalation.
monia) vaccine.
•Expectorants. These agents help loosen and expel
mucus secretions from the airways.
higher. When the operation is successful, patients
•Diuretics. These drugs are given to prevent excess
report significant improvement in symptoms.
water retention in patients with associated right heart
failure.
Pulmonary rehabilitation
•Augmentation therapy (for emphysema due to AAT-
deficiency only). Replacement AAT (Prolastin),derived A structured, outpatient pulmonary rehabilitation
from human blood which has been screened for viruses, program improves functional capacity in certain patients
is injected weekly or bimonthly for life. with COPD. Services may include general exercisetrain-
ing,administration of oxygen and nutritional supplements,
intermittent mechanical ventilatory support,continuous
Surgery
positive airway pressure,relaxation techniques,breathing
Surgical procedures for emphysema are very rare. exercises and techniques (such as pursed lip breathing),
They are expensive and often not covered by insurance. and methods for mobilizing and removing secretions.
The great majority of patients cannot be helped by
surgery,and no single procedure is ideal for those who
Alternative treatment
can be helped. In January of 1996,the government tem-
porarily suspended Medicare payments for lung reduc- For both chronic bronchitis and emphysema,alter-
tion surgery. native practitioners recommend diet and nutritional sup-
plements,a variety of herbal medicines,hydrotherapy,
•Lung transplantation. Lung transplantation has been
acupressureand acupuncture,aromatherapy,home-
successfully employed in some patients with end-stage
opathy,and yoga.
COPD. In the hands of an experienced team,the one-
year survival rate is over 70%.
Prognosis
•Lung volume reduction. These procedures remove
20–30% of severely diseased lung tissue; the remaining COPD is a disease that can be treated and controlled,
parts of the lung are joined together. Mortality rates can but not cured. Survival of patients with COPD is clearly
be as high as 15% and complication rates are even related to the degree of their lung function when they are
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 811
Chronic
obstructive
lung
disease
diagnosed and the rate at which they lose this function. Churg-Strauss syndrome see Vasculitis
Overall, the median survival is about 10 years for
Cingulotomy see Psychosurgery
patients with COPD who have lost approximately two-
thirds of their lung function at diagnosis. Ciprofloxacin see Fluoroquinolones
Circadian rhythm sleep disorders see Jet lag
Prevention
Lifestyle modifications that can help prevent COPD,
or improve function in COPD patients,include:quitting
smoking, avoiding respiratory irritants and infections,
avoiding allergens,maintaining good nutrition,drinking
Circumcision
lots of fluids,avoiding excessively low or high tempera-
tures and very high altitudes,maintaining proper weight,
Definition
and exercising to increase muscle tone.
The surgical removal of the foreskin of the penis or
prepuce.
Resources
BOOKS
Purpose
The Burton Goldberg Group. Alternative Medicine:The Defin-
itive Guide.Fife,WA:Future Medicine Publishing,1995.
In the United States,circumcision in infant boys is
Honig,Eric G.,and Ronald H. Ingram Jr. “Chronic Bronchitis,
performed for social,medical,or cultural/religious rea-
Emphysema,and Airways Obstruction.”In Harrison’s
sons. Once a routine operation urged by pediatricians
Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et
and obstetricians for newborns in the middle of the twen-
al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
tieth century,circumcision has become an elective option
Ries,Andrew L.,et al. Shortness of Breath.St. Louis:Mosby,
1996. that parents make for their sons on an individual basis.
Families who practice Judaism or Islam may select to
PERIODICALS
have their sons circumcised as a religious practice. Oth-
Celli,Bartolome,et al. “The Challenge of COPD:Therapeutic
ers choose circumcision for medical benefits.
Strategies That Work.”Patient Care31 (15 Mar. 1997):
101-118. Female circumcision (also known as female genital
Cordova,Francis C.,and Gerard J. Griner. “Management of mutilation) is usually performed for cultural and social
Advanced Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.” reasons by family members and others who are not mem-
Comprehensive Therapy23,no. 6:413-424.
bers of the medical profession,with no anesthesia. Not
Lefrak,Stephen S.,et al. “Recent Advances in Surgery for
only is the prepuce removed but often the vaginal open-
Emphysema.”Annual Review of Medicine48:387-398.
ing is sewn to make it smaller. This practice is supposed
Petty,Thomas L.,and Gail G. Weinmann. “Building a National
to ensure the virginity of a bride on her wedding day. It
Strategy for the Prevention and Management of and
also prevents the woman from achieving sexual pleasure
Research in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.”
Journal of the American Medical Association277 (15 Jan. during coitus. This practice is not universally approved
1997):246-253. by the medical profession and is considered by some as a
human rights violation.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Association for Respiratory Care. 11030 Ables Lane, Though the incidence of male circumcision has
Dallas,TX 75229. (214) 243-2272. <http://www.aarc.org>. decreased from 90% in 1979 to 60% in 1996,it is still the
American Lung Association. 1740 Broadway,New York,NY most common surgical operation in the United States.
10019. (800) 586-4872. <http://www.lungusa.org>. Circumcision rates are much lower for the rest of the
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
industrialized world. In Britain,it is only done for reli-
Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://www.
gious practices or to correct a specific medical condition
nhlbi.nih.gov>.
of the penis.
National Jewish Medical and Research Center. 1400 Jackson
St.,Denver,CO 80206. (800) 222-LUNG (Lung Line). Some of the medical reasons parents choose cir-
<http://www.njc.org>. cumcision are to protect against infections of the uri-
nary tract and the foreskin,prevent cancer,lower the
Harry W. Golden risk of getting sexually transmitted diseases,and pre-
vent phimosis (a tightening of the foreskin that may
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease see
close the opening of the penis). Though studies indi-
Emphysema; Chronic obstructive lung
cate that uncircumcised boys under the age of five are
disease 20 times more likely than circumcised boys to have
812 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noisicmucriC
KEY TERMS
Foreskin—A covering fold of skin over the tip of
the penis.
Glans—The cone-shaped tip of the penis.
Hernia—Bulging of abdominal structures through
an abnormal opening in the muscular wall.
Hydrocele—Collection of fluid in the scrotum.
Hypospadias—A congenital deformity of the penis
where the urinary tract opening is not at the tip of
the glans.
Phimosis—A tightening of the foreskin that may
close the opening of the penis.
Prepuce—A fold like the foreskin that covers the
clitoris; another name for foreskin.
strong enough to recommended circumcision as a routine
practice.
Precautions
Circumcision should not be performed on infants
with certain deformities of the penis that may require a
portion of the foreskin for repair. The most common con-
dition for surgery using the foreskin is hypospadias, a
congenital deformity of the penis where the urinary tract
opening is not at the tip of the glans. Also,infants with a
large hydrocoele or herniamay suffer important compli-
cations through circumcision. Premature infants and
infants with serious infections are also poor candidates to
be circumcised, as are infants with hemophilia, other
bleeding disorders,or whose mothers had taken anticoag-
urinary tract infections (UTIs),the rate of incidence of
ulant drugs. In older boys or men,circumcision is a minor
UTIs is quite low. There are also indications that cir-
procedure. Therefore, it can be performed in virtually
cumcised men are less likely to suffer from penile can- anyone without a serious illness or unusual deformity.
cer,inflammation of the penis,or have many sexually
transmitted diseases. Here again,the rate of incidence
is low. Good hygiene usually prevents most infections Description
of the penis. Phimosis and penile cancer are very rare,
The foreskin of the penis protects the sensitivity of
even in men who have not been circumcised. Education
the glans and shields it from irritation by urine, feces,
and good safe sex practices can prevent sexually trans-
and foreign materials. It also protects the urinary opening
mitted diseases in ways that a surgical procedure can-
against infection and incidental injury.
not because these are diseases acquired through risky
behaviors. In circumcision of infants, the foreskin is pulled
tightly into a specially designed clamp,and the foreskin
With these factors in mind,the American Academy pulls away from the broadened tip of the penis. Pressure
of Pediatrics has issued a policy statement that states from the clamp stops bleeding from blood vessels that
though there is existing scientific evidence that indicates supplied the foreskin. In older boys or adults,an incision
the medical benefits of circumcision,the benefits aren’t is made around the base of the foreskin,the foreskin is
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 813
Circumcision
Figure A Figure B
Figure C Figure D
A typical circumcision procedure involves the following
steps:Figure A:The surgeon makes an incision around the
foreskin.Figure B:The foreskin is then freed from the skin
covering the penile shaft.Figure C:The surgeon cuts the
foreskin to the initial incision,lifting the foreskin from the
mucous membrane.Figure D:The surgeon sutures the top
edge of the skin that covers the penile shaft and the mucous
membrane.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
cations and is usually easy to control. Infections are rare
and present with feverand signs of inflammation.
There may be injuries to the penis itself,and these
may be difficult to repair. In 2000,there were reports that
the surgical clamps used in circumcision were at fault in
over 100 injuries reported between July 1996 and January
2000. In nearly all cases,the clamps were assumed to be
in working order but had been repaired with replacement
parts that were not of the manufacturer’s specifications.
Physicians were urged to inspect the clamps before use
and ensure that their dimensions fit their infant patients.
Resources
BOOKS
Gollaher,David L. Circumcision:A History of the World’s
Most Controversial Surgery.Basic Books,2000.
pulled back,and then it is cut away from the tip of the PERIODICALS
penis. Stitches are usually used to close the skin edges. Imperio,Winnie Anne. “Circumcision Appears Safe,But Not
Hugely Beneficial.”OB GYN News35,no. 7 (1 Apr.
2000):9.
Preparation
Schmitt,B. D. “The Circumcision Descision:Pros and Cons.”
Despite a long-standing belief that infants do not Clinical Reference Systems(2000):1579.
experience serious painfrom circumcision,most author- OTHER
ities now believe that some form of local anesthesia is American Academy of Pediatrics. New AAP Circumcision Poli-
necessary. The physician injects local anesthesia at the cy Released (Press Release).1 Mar. 1999. <http://www.
base of the penis or under the skin around the penis (sub- aap.org/advocacy/archives/marcircum.htm>.
cutaneous ring block). Both anesthetics block key
Janie F. Franz
nerves. EMLA cream,a topical formula of several anes-
thetics can also be used.
Aftercare
Cirrhosis
After circumcision, the wound should be washed
daily. An antibiotic ointment or petroleum jelly may be
Definition
applied to the site. If there is an incision,a wound dress-
ing will be present and should be changed each time the Cirrhosis is a chronic,degenerative disease in which
diaper is changed. Sometimes a plastic ring is used normal liver cells are damaged and are then replaced by
instead of a bandage. The ring will usually fall off in five scar tissue.
to eight days. The penis will heal in seven to 10 days.
Infants who undergo circumcision may be fussy for Description
some hours afterward,so parents should be prepared for Cirrhosis changes the structure of the liver and the
crying,feeding problems,and sleep problems. Generally blood vessels that nourish it. The disease reduces the
these go away within a day. In older boys,the penis may be liver’s ability to manufacture proteins and process hor-
painful,but this will go away gradually. A topical anesthet- mones,nutrients,medications,and poisons.
ic ointment or spray may be used to relieve this temporary
Cirrhosis gets worse over time and can become
discomfort. There may also be a “bruise” on the penis,
potentially life threatening. This disease can cause:
which typically goes away with no particular attention.
•excessive bleeding (hemorrhage)
Risks •impotence
•liver cancer
Complications following newborn circumcision
appear in one out of every 500 procedures. Most compli- •coma due to accumulated ammonia and body wastes
cations are minor. Bleeding occurs in half of the compli- (liver failure)
814 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisohrriC
A B
A.uncircumcised penis.B.circumcised penis.(Illustration by
Argosy Inc.)
•death This form of the disease affects up to 40% of all patients
who have cirrhosis.
Cirrhosis is the seventh leading cause of disease-
related death in the United States. It is twice as common Disorders like the inability to metabolize iron and
in men as in women. The disease occurs in more than similar disorders may cause pigment cirrhosis (hemo-
half of all malnourished chronic alcoholics and kills chromatosis),which accounts for 5–10% of all instances
about 25,000 people a year. It is the third most common of the disease.
cause of death in adults between the ages of 45 and 65.
Types of cirrhosis Causes and symptoms
Portal or nutritional cirrhosis is the form of the dis- Long-term alcoholism is the primary cause of cir-
ease most common in the United States. About 30–50% rhosis in the United States. Men and women respond dif-
of all cases of cirrhosis are this type. Nine out of every 10 ferently to alcohol. Although most men can safely con-
people who have nutritional cirrhosis have a history of sume two to five drinks a day, one or two drinks a day
alcoholism. Portal or nutritional cirrhosis is also called can cause liver damage in women. Individual tolerance to
Laënnec’s cirrhosis. alcohol varies, but people who drink more and drink
Biliary cirrhosis is caused by intrahepatic bile-duct more often have a higher risk of developing cirrhosis. In
diseases that impede bile flow. Bile is formed in the liver some people,one drink a day can cause liver scarring.
and is carried by ducts to the intestines. Bile then helps
Chronic liver infections like hepatitis B and particu-
digest fats in the intestines. Biliary cirrhosis can scar or
larly hepatitis C are commonly linked to cirrhosis. Peo-
block these ducts. It represents 15–20% of all cirrhosis.
ple at high risk of contracting hepatitis B include those
Various types of chronic hepatitis,especially hepati- exposed to the virus through contact with blood and body
tis Band hepatitis C,can cause postnecrotic cirrhosis. fluids. This includes healthcare workers and intraveneous
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 815
Cirrhosis
A micrograph of a human liver showing tissue damaged by cirrhosis.(Photograph by Professor P.Motta, Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced by permission.)
(IV) drug users. People in the past have contracted Cirrhosis can cause extremely dry skin and intense
hepatitis C through blood transfusions. itching. The whites of the eyes and the skin may turn
yellow (jaundice), and urine may be dark yellow or
Liver injury,reactions to prescription medications,
brown. Stools may be black or bloody. Sometimes the
exposure to toxic substances,and repeated episodes of
patient develops persistent high blood pressure due to the
heart failurewith liver congestion can cause cirrhosis.
scarring (portal hypertension). This type of hyperten-
The disorder can also be a result of diseases that run in
sion can be life threatening. It can cause veins to enlarge
families (inherited diseases) like:
in the stomach and in the tube leading from the mouth to
•a lack of a specific liver enzyme (alpha-antitrypsin the stomach (esophagus). These enlarged veins are called
1
deficiency) varices,and they can rupture and bleed massively.
•the absence of a milk-digesting enzyme (galactosemia) Other symptoms of cirrhosis include:
•an inability to convert sugars to energy (glycogen stor- •anemia
age disease)
•bleeding gums
•an absorption deficit in which excess iron is deposited in
•decreased interest in sex
the liver,pancreas,heart,and other organs (hemochro-
matosis) •fever
•fluid in the lungs
•a disorder characterized by accumulations of copper in
the liver,brain,kidneys,and corneas (Wilson’s disease) •hallucinations
Poor nutritionincreases a person’s risk of develop- •lethargy
ing cirrhosis. In about 10 out of every 100 patients,the
•lightheadedness
cause of cirrhosis cannot be determined. Many people
who have cirrhosis do not have any symptoms (often •muscle weakness
called compensated cirrhosis). Their disease is detected •musty breath
during a routine physical or when tests for an unrelated
•painful nerve inflammation (neuritis)
medical problem are performed. This type of cirrhosis
can also be detected when complications occur (decom- •slurred speech
pensated cirrhosis).
•tremors
Symptoms of cirrhosis are usually caused by the loss
If the liver loses its ability to remove toxins from the
of functioning liver cells or organ swelling due to scarring.
brain, the patient may have additional symptoms. The
The liver enlarges during the early stages of illness. The
patient may become forgetful and unresponsive,neglect
palms of the hands turn red and patients may experience:
personal care, have trouble concentrating, and acquire
•constipation new sleeping habits. These symptoms are related to
ammonia intoxication and the failure of the liver to con-
•diarrhea
vert ammonia to urea. High protein intake in these
•dull abdominal pain patients can also lead to these symptoms.
•fatigue
Diagnosis
•indigestion
•loss of appetite A patient’s medical history can reveal illnesses or
lifestyles likely to lead to cirrhosis. Liver changes can be
•nausea
seen during a physical examination. A doctor who sus-
•vomiting pects cirrhosis may order blood and urine tests to measure
liver function. Because only a small number of healthy
•weakness
cells are needed to carry out essential liver functions,test
•weight loss results may be normal even when cirrhosis is present.
As the disease progresses,the spleen enlarges and Computed tomography scans (CT), ultrasound,
fluid collects in the abdomen (ascites) and legs (edema). and other imaging techniques can be used during diagno-
Spider-like blood vessels appear on the chest and shoul- sis. They can help determine the size of the liver,indicate
ders, and bruising becomes common. Men sometimes healthy and scarred areas of the organ,and detect gall-
lose chest hair. Their breasts may grow and their testicles stones. Cirrhosis is sometimes diagnosed during surgery
may shrink. Women may have menstrual irregularities. or by examining the liver with a laparoscope. This view-
816 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisohrriC
ing device is inserted into the patient’s body through a day should prevent the sick or bloated feeling patients
tiny incision in the abdomen. with cirrhosis often have after eating. Alcohol and caf-
feine, which destroy liver cells, should be avoided. So
Liver biopsyis usually needed to confirm a diagno-
should any foods that upset the stomach. Patients with
sis of cirrhosis. In this procedure, a tissue sample is
brain disease associated with cirrhosis should avoid
removed from the liver and is examined under a micro-
excessive amounts of protein in the diet.
scope in order to learn more about the organ.
A patient can keep a food diary that describes what
was eaten, when it was eaten, and how the patient felt
Treatment
afterwards. This diary can be useful in identifying foods
The goal of treatment is to cure or reduce the condi- that are hard to digest and in scheduling meals to coin-
tion causing cirrhosis,prevent or delay disease progres- cide with the times the patient is most hungry.
sion,and prevent or treat complications.
Patients who have cirrhosis should weigh them-
Salt and fluid intake are often limited,and activity is selves every day and notify their doctor of a sudden gain
encouraged. A diet high in calories and moderately high in of five pounds or more. A doctor should also be notified
protein can benefit some patients. Tube feedingsor vita- if symptoms of cirrhosis appear in anyone who has not
min supplements may be prescribed if the liver continues been diagnosed with the disease. A doctor should also be
to deteriorate. Patients are asked not to consume alcohol. notified if a patient diagnosed with cirrhosis:
•vomits blood
Medication
•passes black stools
Iron supplements,diuretics,and antibioticsmay be
•seems confused or unresponsive
used for anemia,fluid retention,and ammonia accumula-
tion associated with cirrhosis. Vasoconstrictors are some- •shows signs of infection (redness,swelling,tenderness,
times needed to stop internal bleeding and antiemetics pain)
may be prescribed to control nausea.
Laxativeshelp the body absorb toxins and acceler- Alternative treatment
ate their removal from the digestive tract. Beta blockers Alternative treatments for cirrhosis are aimed at pro-
may be prescribed to control cirrhosis-induced portal moting the function of healthy liver cells and relieving the
hypertension. Because the diseased liver can no longer symptoms associated with the disease. Several herbal
efficiently neutralize harmful substances, medications remedies may be helpful to cirrhosis patients. Dandelion
must be given with caution. Interferon medicines may be (Taraxacum officinale) and rock-poppy (Chelidonium
used by patients with chronic hepatitis B and hepatitis C majus) may help improve the efficiency of liver cells.
to prevent post-hepatic cirrhosis. Milk thistle extract (Silybum marianum) may slow dis-
ease progression and significantly improve survival rates
Surgery in alcoholics and other cirrhosis patients. Practitioners of
homeopathyand traditional Chinese medicinecan also
Medication that causes scarring can be injected
prescribe treatments that support healthy liver function.
directly into veins to control bleeding from varices in the
stomach or esophagus. Varices may require a special sur-
gical procedure called balloon tamponade ligation to stop Prognosis
the bleeding. Surgery may be required to repair disease- Cirrhosis-related liver damage cannot be reversed,
related throat damage. It is sometimes necessary to but further damage can be prevented by patients who:
remove diseased portions of the spleen and other organs.
•eat properly
Liver transplants can benefit patients with advanced
•get enough rest
cirrhosis. However,the new liver will eventually become
diseased unless the underlying cause of cirrhosis is •do not consume alcohol
removed. Patients with alcoholic cirrhosis must demon- •remain free of infection
strate a willingness to stop drinking before being consid-
If the underlying cause of cirrhosis cannot be cor-
ered suitable transplant candidates.
rected or removed,scarring will continue. The liver will
fail,and the patient will probably die within five years.
Supportive measures
Patients who stop drinking after being diagnosed with
A balanced diet promotes regeneration of healthy cirrhosis can increase their likelihood of living more than
liver cells. Eating five or six small meals throughout the a few years from 40% to 60–70%.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 817
Cirrhosis
Prevention Clarithromycin see Erythromycins
Eliminating alcohol abuse could prevent 75–80% of
all cases of cirrhosis.
Other preventive measures include:
•obtaining counseling or other treatment for alcoholism Cleft lip and palate
•taking precautions (practicing safe sex,avoiding dirty
Definition
needles) to prevent hepatitis
A cleft is a birth defect that occurs when the tissues
•getting immunizations against hepatitis if a person is in
of the lip and/or palate of the fetus do not fuse very early
a high-risk group
in pregnancy. A cleft lip, sometimes referred to as a
•receiving appropriate medical treatment quickly when
harelip,is an opening in the upper lip that can extend into
diagnosed with hepatitis B or hepatitis C
the base of the nostril. A cleft palate is an opening in the
•having blood drawn at regular intervals to rid the body roof of the mouth.
of excess iron from hemochromatosis
•using medicines (chelating agents) to rid the body of Description
excess copper from Wilson’s disease
Babies born with cleft lips will have an opening involv-
•wearing protective clothing and following product ing the upper lip. The length of the opening ranges from a
directions when using toxic chemicals at work, at small notch,to a cleft that extends into the base of the nos-
home,or in the garden tril. Cleft lips may involve one or both sides of the lip.
Babies born with cleft palates have openings in the
Resources palate,which is the roof of the mouth. The size and posi-
tion of the opening varies. The cleft may be only in the
BOOKS
hard palate, the bony portion of the roof of the mouth,
Berkow,Robert,ed. The Merck Manual of Medical Informa-
tion:Home Edition.Whitehouse Station,NJ:Merck opening into the floor of the nose. It may be only in the
Research Laboratories,1997. soft palate,the soft portion of the roof of the mouth. The
The Editors of Time-Life Books. The Medical Advisor:The cleft palate may involve both the hard and soft palate and
Complete Guide to Alternative and Conventional Treat- may occur on both sides of the center of the palate.
ments.Alexandria,VA:Time Life,Inc.,1996.
Babies may have cleft lips with or without cleft
Springhouse Corporation. Everything You Need to Know About
palates. Cleft palates may also occur without cleft lips.
Diseases.Springhouse,PA:Springhouse Corporation,
1996. The incidence of cleft lip and palate not associated
with a syndrome is one in 700 newborns. Native Ameri-
ORGANIZATIONS
cans have an incidence of 3.6 in 1,000 newborns. The inci-
American Liver Foundation. 1425 Pompton Ave.,Cedar Grove,
dence among Japanese newborns is 2.1 in 1,000. The inci-
NJ 07009. (800) 223-0179. <http://www.liverfoundation.
dence among whites is one in 1,000 newborns. African
org>.
United Network for Organ Sharing. 1100 Boulders Parkway, Americans have an incidence of 0.3 in 1,000 newborns.
Suite 500,P.O. Box 13770,Richmond,VA 23225-8770.
(804) 330-8500.
Causes and symptoms
OTHER
Cleft lips and palates not associated with a syn-
“Cirrhosis of the Liver.”ThriveOnline.8 May 1998 <http://
drome are caused by a combination of genetic and envi-
thriveonline.oxygen.com>.
ronmental factors. Inheritance caused by such a combi-
“Cirrhosis of the Liver.”National Institute of Diabetes and Diges-
nation is called multifactorial. The embryo inherits genes
tive and Kidney Disease.<http://www.niddk.nih.gov>.
that increase the risk for cleft lip and/or palate. When an
embryo with such genes is exposed to certain environ-
Maureen Haggerty
mental factors the embryo develops a cleft.
Cisapride see Antigastroesophageal reflux The risk of a baby being born with a cleft lip or
drugs palate increases with the number of affected relatives and
increases with relatives that have more severe clefts.
CK test see Creatine kinase test
Environmental factors that increase the risk of cleft
Clap see Gonorrhea lip and palate include cigarette and alcohol use during
818 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
etalap
dna
pil
tfelC
pregnancy. Some drugs also increase the incidence of
clefting, such as phenytoin, sodium valproate, and
methotrexate. The pregnant mother’s nutrition may
affect the incidence of clefting as well.
Babies born with a cleft lip will be seen to have an
elongated opening in the upper lip. The size of this opening
may range from a small notch in the upper lip to an open-
ing that extends into the base of the nostril. The cleft lip
may be below the right or left nostril or below both nostrils.
Babies born with a cleft palate will be seen to have
an opening into the roof of the mouth. The size and posi-
tion of the cleft varies and it may involve only the hard
palate, or only the soft palate and may occur on both
sides of the center of the palate.
In some cases the cleft palate will be covered with
the normal lining of the mouth and can only be felt by
the examiner.
Babies with cleft lips and palates have feeding diffi-
culties, which are more severe in babies with cleft
palates. The difficulty in feeding is due to the baby being
unable to achieve complete suction. In the case of clefts
of the hard palate,liquids enter the nose from the mouth
through the opening in the hard palate.
problems with feeding and frequently require special
A cleft palate also affects a child’s speech,since the bottles and teats. A palatal obturator is a device that fits
palate is necessary for speech formation. The child’s into the roof of the mouth,thus blocking the cleft open-
speech pattern may still be affected despite surgical repair. ing and allowing easier suckling.
Ear infections are more common in babies born with Surgery to repair cleft lips is sometimes performed
cleft palates. The infections occur because the muscles of after orthodontic treatment to narrow the gap in the upper
the palate do not open the Eustachian tubes which drain lip. The orthodontic treatment can involve acrylic splints
the middle ear. This allows fluid to collect and increases with or without screws or may involve the use of adhesive
the risk of infection and hearing loss. tape placed across the gap in the lip. The orthodontic treat-
Teeth may also erupt misaligned. ment for cleft lip should be started within the first three
weeks of life and continue until the cleft lip is repaired.
Diagnosis The timing of surgical cleft lip repair depends on the
judgment of the surgeon who will perform the operation.
Cleft lip and palate can be diagnosed before birth by
The procedure is usually performed between one and
ultrasound. After birth,cleft lip and palate are diagnosed
three months of age. The goals of the operation are to
by physical exam.
close the gap in the upper lip,place scars in the natural
skin curves and to repair muscle so that the lip appears
Treatment normal during movement. The closure is done in the
three layers (skin, muscle, and mucosa) that line the
If cleft lip and/or palate are diagnosed by ultrasound
inside of the lip. At the time of the procedure,if the nose
before birth,further testing may be required to diagnose
is shaped abnormally due to the cleft lip,it is also cor-
associated abnormalities if present. Referral to a cleft
rected. Sometimes further surgery may be needed on the
team is essential. A cleft team consists of specialists in
lip and/or nose to refine the result.
the management of babies with clefts and includes sur-
geons as well as nurses and speech therapists. Members The goals of the surgeon repairing a cleft palate are
of the team inform the parents of all aspects of manage- normal speech,normal facial growth,and hearing for the
ment. Feeding methods are also discussed,since feeding affected infant. The repair of the cleft palate is usually per-
is the first problem that must be dealt with. It may be formed between three and 18 months of age. The timing
possible to breastfeed a baby born with only a cleft lip, may extend beyond this and varies with the type of cleft
but babies born with cleft palates usually have more palate and center where the procedure is being performed.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 819
Cleft
lip
and
palate
This infant has an unilateral cleft lip and palate.(Custom
Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Depending of the type of cleft palate,more than one oper-
ation may be needed to close the cleft and improve speech. Clenched fist injury
Nonsurgical treatment of a cleft palate is available for
Definition
patients who are at high risk for surgery and consists of a
prosthetic appliance worn to block the opening in the palate. A clenched fist injury (CFI) is a bite wound on the
hand,caused when a person’s closed fist strikes the teeth
Babies born with cleft palates are vulnerable to ear
of another person,usually in the course of a fight. CFIs are
infections. Their Eustachian tubes do not effectively
sometimes referred to as closed fist injuries or fight bites.
drain fluid from the middle ear so fluid accumulates and
infection sets in. This may lead to hearing loss. These
children require drainage tubes to be inserted to prevent Description
fluid accumulation.
Clenched fist injuries are most common over the
Babies born with clefts usually require orthodontic metacarpo phalangeal joint. Their appearance is deceptive
treatment between 13 and 18 years of age. They also because they do not bleed heavily and the underlying injury
require speech therapy. is hidden by soft tissue when the patient opens his hand and
straightens the injured finger. CFIs can,however,have seri-
Prognosis ous consequences,including infection,cellulitis,inflam-
mation of the bone or bone marrow (osteomyelitis),septic
Babies born with cleft lip and palate have a good
arthritis,and inflammation of the sheaths covering the ten-
prognosis,and approximately 80% will develop normal
dons of the hand (tenosynovitis). These may lead to perma-
speech. There is no known means of preventing clefting.
nent loss of function or amputation.
Good prenatal care is essential and avoiding harmful
Most CFIs result in tissue injury due to the force of
substances appear to reduce the risk.
impact, ragged-edged tears in the skin resulting from
contact with the teeth,and contamination of the wound
Resources
by the bacteria in human saliva. As the patient opens his
PERIODICALS hand,the skin of the finger is pulled backward over the
Litwak-Saleh,Kim. “Practical Points in the case of the Patient deeper part of the wound,thus sealing bacteria within the
with post-Cleft lip repair.”Journal of Post Anesthesia injured tissue. This sealing of the wound by normal
Nursing8 (February 1993):35–37. motions of the finger is the reason why clenched fist
Chung,Kevin C. “Maternal Cigarette Smoking during Preg- injuries have the highest rate of infection of any human
nancy and the risk of having a child with Cleft
bite. The rate of infection of clenched-fist injuries varies
Lip/Palate.”Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery105 (Feb-
from 15–50%.
ruary 2000):458–491.
Christensen,Karr. “The 20th Century Danish Facial Cleft Pop-
ulation—Epidemiological and Genetic-Epidemiolical Causes and symptoms
Studies.”Cleft Palate—Craniofacial Journal36 (March
1999):96–104. The causes of CFIs include fighting and other forms
Bender,Patricia L. “Genetics of Cleft Lip and Palate.”Journal of aggressive behavior, often combined with drug or
of Pediatric Nursing15 (August 2000):242–249. alcohol consumption.
Rohrich,Rod J. “Optimal Timing of Cleft Palate Closure.”
The symptoms of clenched fist injury include pain
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery106 (August):
in the affected part of the hand and some stiffness of the
413–421.
injured finger with limitation of movement. If the patient
Cockell,Anna. “Prenatal Diagnosis and Management of orofacial
Clefts.”Prenatal Diagnosis20 (February 2000):149–151. has delayed getting medical treatment,there may be evi-
Denk,Michael J. “Topics in Pediatric Plastic Surgery.”Pedi- dence of infection,including swelling,redness,and sup-
atric Clinics of North America45 (December 1998). puration (a discharge of pus). The skin around the wound
will be warm to the touch and fevermay be present.
ORGANIZATIONS
Cleft Palate Foundation. (800) 24-CLEFT. <http://www.
cleftline.org>. Diagnosis
Diagnosis of clenched fist injuries is usually made
Farris F. Gulli,MD
on the basis of the location of the injury and x-ray find-
ings. The most common finding in CFI x rays is soft tis-
Cleft palate see Cleft lip and palate
sue swelling,but the x rays may also reveal air pockets in
Climacteric see Menopause deep tissues or the joint spaces,fragments of teeth,frac-
820 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yrujni
tsif
dehcnelC
ture lines in the bones,or small loose bone chips. Diag-
nosis is often complicated by the fact that the patient will KEY TERMS
be reluctant to admit how the injury happened. The treat-
ing physician must maintain a high level of suspicion and Antibiotic—A chemical substance produced by a
often ask directly. microorganism which can inhibit the growth of or
kill other microorganisms.
Treatment Debridement—Surgical removal of damaged tis-
sue and foreign objects from a wound.
Treatment of clenched fist injuries is complicated by
I&D—Incision and drainage of a wound.
several factors. One factor is the anatomical structure of
the human hand, which contains many small closed Irrigation—Cleansing a wound with large amounts
spaces that make it easy for infection to spread and per- of water and/or an antiseptic solution.
sist. Another is the number of disease-causing bacteria
Parenteral—Administered inside the body but out-
transmitted by human bites; at least 42 different species
side the digestive tract.
have been identified. In addition,CFIs typically do not
Tetanus toxoid—Tetanus toxoid is a vaccine used
receive immediate treatment because the patient is con-
to prevent tetanus (also known as lockjaw).
cerned about legal consequences. The longer the delay,
the higher the chances of infection and permanent dam-
age to the hand. Patients who wait longer than 24 hours
to seek treatment or have signs of infection or damage to
the tendon,joint capsule,or bones are usually referred Infected clenched fist injuries usually contain sever-
immediately to a doctor who specializes in hand surgery. al disease-causing bacteria, the most common being
Streptococcus pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, Bac-
The first step in treatment of clenched fist injury is irri-
teroides sp.,Peptostreptococcus sp.,and Eikenella corro-
gation,a procedure by which the wound is flushed with a
dens. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are usually given.
stream of water under high pressure or with an antiseptic
Uninfected and relatively superficial CFIs may be treated
solution. Incision and drainage of the wound (I&D) may be
with oral penicillin plus dicloxacillin or Augmentin. For
required as well as debridement,the surgical removal of
infected CFIs, parenteral penicillin G is usually given
dead tissue and foreign objects from a wound. Careful
together with nafcillin or cefuroxime. CFIs infected by
examination of the depth of the wound is essential to prop-
drug-resistant strains of S. aureusmay require treatment
er treatment. The surgeon may need to enlarge the sides of
with vancomycin.
the wound in order to make an accurate evaluation. The
patient will be asked to move the affected joint through its
Prognosis
full range of motion so that the surgeon can determine
whether the tendon or joint capsule has been damaged. Fol- The prognosis depends on the patient’s underlying
lowing these procedures,the surgeon will pack the wound state of health and compliance with treatment; depth of
and put the hand in a splint. Bite woundsare never sutured the wound; the involvement of the joint capsule or ten-
(sewn shut) because of the possibility of enclosing bacteria don; and the length of time before the wound is treated.
inside the injury. After 24 hours, the packing will be The more superficial the wound and the faster the treat-
removed and the hand reexamined for signs of infection. ment,the better the prognosis.
If the wound has become infected,the patient is usu-
ally hospitalized and given parenteral (injectable) antibi- Prevention
otics. The wound is irrigated and examined to determine
The best way to prevent clenched fist injuries is to
the extent of the injury. Cultures are taken for both aerobic
avoid fist fights,intoxication,and association with peo-
(requiring air or oxygen to live) and anaerobic (not requir-
ple who practice these forms of behavior. If involved in a
ing air or oxygen) species of bacteria. The cultures should
fistfight,people should avoid directing punches at their
be taken from areas deep in the wound rather than from
opponent’s mouth. The next best preventive measure is to
the surface for greater accuracy. Tetanustoxoid should be
get medical treatment at once for a clenched-fist injury.
given if the patient has not been immunized within the last
10 years. The patient should also receive treatment and
follow-up for the rare possibility of HIV and hepatitis Resources
transmission. Although no well-documented cases of HIV
BOOKS
transmission by human bites exist as of 2001,the potential Jacobs,Richard A.,MD. “Animal & Human Bite Wounds.”In
for transmission by this route is still present. “General Problems in Infectious Diseases.”Current Med-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 821
Clenched
fist
injury
ical Diagnosis & Treatment 2001. 40th edition. Ed. L. M. Clubfoot can affect one foot or both. Sometimes an
Tierney,Jr.,MD,et al. New York:Lange Medical infant’s feet appear abnormal at birth because of the
Books/McGraw-Hill,2001. intrauterine position of the fetus birth. If there is no
Taylor,Mark D.,MD,and Samuel E. Wilson,MD. “Bacterial anatomic abnormality of the bone,this is not true club-
Diseases of the Skin.”In Conn’s Current Therapy 2001,
foot,and the problem can usually be corrected by apply-
ed. Robert E. Rakel,MD,and Edward T. Bope,MD.
ing special braces or casts to straighten the foot.
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Company,2001.
The ratio of males to females with clubfoot is 2.5 to
PERIODICALS
1. The incidence of clubfoot varies only slightly. In the
Berlet,Greg,et al. “Clenched-fist injury complicated by methi-
United States,the incidence is approximately 1 in every
cillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.”Canadian Journal
1,000 live births. A 1980 Danish study reported an over-
of Surgery/Journal canadien de chirurgie40 (4) (August
all incidence of 1.20 in every 1,000 children; by 1994,
1997):313-314.
that number had doubled to 2.41 in every 1,000 live
ORGANIZATIONS births. No reason was offered for the increase.
Massachusetts College of Emergency Physicians (MACEP).
P. O. Box 296,Swansea,MA 02777. (508) 643-0117. Fax:
(508) 643-0141. Causes and symptoms
Experts do not agree on the precise cause of club-
Rebecca J. Frey,PhD
foot. The exact genetic mechanism of inheritance has
been extensively investigated using family studies and
Clomiphene see Infertility drugs
other epidemiological methods. As of 1999,no definitive
Clonazepam see Benzodiazepines conclusions had been reached,although a Mendelian pat-
tern of inheritance is suspected. This may be due to the
Closed fracture reduction see Fracture
interaction of several different inheritance patterns,dif-
repair
ferent patterns of development appearing as the same
Clostridium difficile colitis see Antibiotic- condition,or a complex interaction between genetic and
associated colitis environmental factors. The MSX1 gene has been associ-
ated with clubfoot in animal studies. But, as of 2001,
Clotrimazole see Antifungal drugs, topical
these findings have not been replicated in humans.
Clotting disorders see Coagulation disorders
A family history of clubfoot has been reported in
24.4% of families in a single study. These findings sug-
gest the potential role of one or more genes being respon-
sible for clubfoot.
Several environmental causes have been proposed
Clubfoot for clubfoot. Obstetricians feel that intrauterine crowd-
ing causes clubfoot. This theory is supported by a sig-
Definition nificantly higher incidence of clubfoot among twins
compared to singleton births. Intrauterine exposure to
Clubfoot is a condition in which one or both feet are
the drug misoprostol has been linked with clubfoot.
twisted into an abnormal position at birth. The condition
Misoprostol is commonly used when trying, usually
is also known as talipes.
unsuccessfully, to induce abortion in Brazil and in
other countries in South and Central America.
Description Researchers in Norway have reported that males who
are in the printing trades have significantly more off-
True clubfoot is characterized by abnormal bone for-
spring with clubfoot than men in other occupations.
mation in the foot. There are four variations of clubfoot,
For unknown reasons,amniocentesis,a prenatal test,
including talipes varus,talipes valgus,talipes equines,
has also been associated with clubfoot. The infants of
and talipes calcaneus. In talipes varus,the most common
mothers who smoke during pregnancyhave a greater
form of clubfoot,the foot generally turns inward so that
chance of being born with clubfoot than are offspring
the leg and foot look somewhat like the letter J. In talipes
of women who do not smoke.
valgus,the foot rotates outward like the letter L. In tal-
ipes equinus,the foot points downward,similar to that of True clubfoot is usually obvious at birth. The four
a toe dancer. In talipes calcaneus,the foot points upward, most common varieties have been described. A clubfoot
with the heel pointing down. has a typical appearance of pointing downward and
822 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
toofbulC
being twisted inwards. Since the condition starts in the
first trimester of pregnancy,the abnormality is quite well
established at birth, and the foot is often very rigid.
Uncorrected clubfoot in an adult causes only part of the
foot, usually the outer edge, or the heel or the toes, to
touch the ground. For a person with clubfoot, walking
becomes difficult or impossible.
Diagnosis
True clubfoot is usually recognizable and obvious
on physical examination. A routine x ray of the foot that
shows the bones to be malformed or misaligned supplies
a confirmed diagnosis of clubfoot. Ultrasonography is
not always useful in diagnosing the presence of clubfoot
prior to the birth of a child.
Treatment
Most orthopedic surgeons agree that the initial treat-
ment of congenital (present at birth) clubfoot should be
non-operative. Non-surgical treatment should begin in
the first days of life to take advantage of the favorable
fibro-elastic properties of the foot’s connective tissues,
those forming the ligaments,joint capsules,and tendons.
In a common treatment,a series of casts is applied over a
period of months to reposition the foot into a normal
alignment. In mild cases,splinting and wearing braces at
night may correct the abnormality.
When clubfoot is severe enough to require surgery,
the condition is usually not completely correctable,
although significant improvement is possible. In the most
severe cases,surgery may be required,especially when
the Achilles tendon,which joins the muscles in the calf
to the bone of the heel,needs to be lengthened. Because
shoes and lead active lives. If clubfoot is not appropriate-
an early operation induces fibrosis,a scarring and stiff-
ly treated, the abnormality becomes fixed. This has an
ness of the tissue, surgery should be delayed until an
effect on the growth of the leg and foot,and some degree
affected child is at least three months old.
of permanent disability usually results.
Much of a clubfoot abnormality can be corrected by
the use of manipulation and casting during the first three
months of life. Proper manipulative techniques must be Resources
followed by applications of appropriately molded plaster BOOKS
casts to provide effective and safe correction of most Hall,Judith G. “Chromosomal Clinical Abnormalilties.”In
varieties of clubfoot. Long-term care by an orthopedist is Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.16th ed. Ed. Richard E.
required after initial treatment to ensure that the correc- Behrman et al. Philadelphia:Saunders,2000,325–34.
tion of the abnormality is maintained. Exercises,correc- Jones,KL. “XO Syndrome.”In Smith’s Recognizable Pat-
tive shoes,or nighttime splints may be needed until the terns of Human Malformation.5th ed. Ed. Kenneth L.
Jones and Judy Fletcher Philadelphia:Saunders,1997,
child stops growing.
pp. 81–7.
Thoene,Jess G.,ed. Physicians’Guide to Rare Diseases.2nd
Prognosis ed. Montvale,NJ:Dowden Publishing Co.,1995.
Van Allen,Margot I.,and Judith G. Hall. “Congenital Anom-
With prompt,expert treatment,clubfoot is usually alies.”In Cecil Textbook of Medicine.21st ed. Ed. Lee
correctable. Most individuals are able to wear regular Goldman,et al. Philadelphia:Saunders,2000,150–52.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 823
Clubfoot
Person suffering from clubfoot.About one of every 400 new-
borns has some form of this birth defect.(Photo
Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS Cluster headache
Definition
Enterovirus—Any of a group of viruses that pri-
marily affect the gastrointestinal tract. Cluster headaches are characterized by an intense
Intrauterine—Situated or occuring in the uterus. one-sided paincentered by the eye or temple. The pain
lasts for one to two hours on average and may recur sev-
Orthopedist—A doctor specializing in treatment
eral times in a day.
of the skeletal system and its associated muscles
and joints.
Description
Cluster headaches have been known as histamine
PERIODICALS headaches,red migraines,and Horton’s disease,among
Chesney,D.,et al. “Epidemiology and Genetic Theories in the
others. The constant factor is the pain,which transcends
Etiology of Congenital Talipes Equinovarus.”Bulletin of
by far the distress of the more common tension-type
the Hospital for Joint Diseases58,no. 1 (1999):59–64.
headacheor even that of a migraine headache.
Gonzalez,C. H.,et al. “Congenital Abnormalities in Brazilian
Children Associated with Misoprostol Misuse in First Cluster headaches afflict less than 0.5% of the popu-
Trimester of Pregnancy.”Lancet351,no. 9116 (May 30, lation and predominantly affect men; approximately 80%
1998):1624–27. of sufferers are male. Onset typically occurs in the late
Honein,M. A.,L. J. Paulozzi,and C. A. Moore. “Family Histo- 20s,but there is no absolute age restriction. Approximate-
ry,Maternal Smoking,and Clubfoot:An Indication of a
ly 80% of cluster headaches are classified as episodic; the
Gene-Environment Interaction.”American Journal of Epi-
remaining 20% are considered chronic. Both display the
demiology157,no. 7 (October 1,2000):658–65.
same symptoms. However, episodic cluster headaches
Lochmiller,C.,et al. “Genetic Epidemiology Study of Idio-
occur during one- to five-month periods followed by six-
pathic Talipes Equinovarus.”American Journal of Med-
to 24-month attack-free,or remission,periods. There is
ical Genetics79,no. 2 (September 1,1998):90–6.
Rebbeck,T. R.,et al. “A Single-Gene Explanation for the Prob- no such reprieve for chronic cluster headache sufferers.
ability of Having Idiopathic Talipes Equinovarus.”Ameri-
can Journal of Human Genetics53,no.5 (November
Causes and symptoms
1993):1051–63.
Robertson,W. W.,and D. Corbett. “Congenital Clubfoot. Biochemical, hormonal, and vascular changes
Month of Conception.”Clinics in Orthopedics340,no.
induce cluster headaches,but why these changes occur
338 (May 1997):14–18.
remains unclear. Episodic cluster headaches seem to be
ORGANIZATIONS linked to changes in day length,possibly signaling a con-
March of Dimes/Birth Defects Foundation. 1275 Mamaroneck nection to the so-called biological clock. Alcohol,tobac-
Ave.,White Plains,NY 10605. (888) 663-4637. resource- co, histamine, or stress can trigger cluster headaches.
center@modimes.org. <http://www.modimes.org>. Decreased blood oxygen levels (hypoxemia) can also act
National Easter Seal Society. 230 W. Monroe St.,Suite 1800,
as a trigger,particularly during the night when an indi-
Chicago,IL 60606-4802. (312) 726-6200 or (800) 221-
vidual is sleeping. Interestingly,the triggers do not cause
6827. <http://www.easter-seals.org>.
cluster headaches during remission periods.
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD). PO Box
8923,New Fairfield,CT 06812-8923. (203) 746-6518 or The primary cluster headache symptom is excruciat-
(800) 999-6673. Fax:(203) 746-6481. <http://www.rare ing one-sided head pain centered behind an eye or near
diseases.org>. the temple. This pain may radiate outward from the ini-
OTHER tial focus and encompass the mouth and teeth. For this
“Clubfoot.”National Library of Medicine.<http://www.nlm. reason,some cluster headache sufferers may mistakenly
nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/ 001228.htm>. attribute their pain to a dental problem. Secondary symp-
Clubfoot.net.<http://www.clubfoot.net/treatment.php3>. toms,occurring on the same side as the pain,include eye
Ponseti,Ignacio,MD. “Treatment of Congenital Clubfoot.” tearing,nasal congestion followed by a runny nose,pupil
Revised January 1998. University of Iowa Health Care. contraction,and facial drooping or flushing.
<http://www.vh.org/Providers/Textbooks/Clubfoot/
Clubfoot.html>.
Schopler,Steven A.,MD. “Clubfoot.”Southern California Diagnosis
Orthopedic Institute.<http://www.scoi.com/clubfoot.htm>.
Cluster headache symptoms guide the diagnosis. A
L. Fleming Fallon,Jr.,MD,DrPH medical examination includes recording headache
824 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ehcadaeh
retsulC
KEY TERMS
Biological clock—A synonym for the body’s circa-
dian rhythm, the natural biological variations that
occur over the course of a day.
Migraine headache—An intense throbbing pain
that occurs on one or both sides of the head. The
headache is usually accompanied by other symp-
toms, such as nausea, vomiting, and aversion to
light.
Prophylactic—Referring to treatment that prevents
symptoms from occurring.
Tension-type headache—A dull pain that seems to
exert pressure on the head; the most common
form of headache.
sumatriptan injection,and application of local anesthet-
ics inside the nose. Surgery is a last resort for chronic
cluster headaches that fail to respond to therapy.
Alternative treatment
details,such as frequency and duration,when it occurs, Since some cluster headaches are triggered by stress,
pain intensity and location, possible triggers, and any stress reduction techniques, such as yoga, meditation,
prior symptoms. This history allows other potential prob- and regular exercise, may be effective. Some cluster
lems to be discounted. headaches may be an allergic response triggered by food or
environmental substances, therefore identifying and
removing the allergen(s) may be key to resolution of the
Treatment
problem. Histamine is another suspected trigger of cluster
Treatment for cluster headaches is composed of headaches,and this response may be controlled with vita-
induction,maintenance,and symptomatic therapies. The min C and the bioflavonoids quercetin and bromelain
first two therapies are prophylactic treatments, geared (pineapple enzyme). Supplementation with essential fatty
toward preventing headaches. Symptomatic therapy is acids (EFA) will help decrease any inflammatory response.
meant to stop or shorten a headache.
Physical medicine therapies such as adjustments of
Induction and maintenance therapies begin together. the spine, craniosacral treatment, and massage at the
Induction therapy is intended to break the headache cycle temporomandibular joint (TMJ) can clear blockages,as
with drugs such as corticosteroids(for example,pred- can traditional Chinese medical therapies including
nisone) or dihydroergotamine. These drugs are not meant acupuncture. Homeopathic treatment can also be bene-
for long-term therapy,but rather as a jump-start for main- ficial. Nervous system relaxant herbs,used singly or in
tenance therapy. Maintenance therapy drugs include ver- combination, can allow the central nervous system to
apamil, lithium carbonate, ergotamine, and methy- relax as well as assist in peripheral nerve response. A few
sergide. These drugs have long-term effectiveness, but herbs to consider for relaxation are valerian (Valeriana
must be taken for at least a week before a response is officinalis),chamomile (Matricaria recutita),rosemary
observed. With long-term treatment,methysergide must (Rosemarinus officinalis), and skullcap (Scutellaria
be stopped for one month each year to avoid dangerous baicalensis).
side effects (formation of fibrous tissue inside the
abdominal artery,lungs,and heart valves).
Prognosis
Despite prophylactic treatment,headaches may still
occur. Symptomatic therapy includes oxygen inhalation, In general,drug therapy offers effective treatment.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 825
Cluster
headache
Areas of pain
Nerves
Cluster Headache
The primary cluster headache symptom is excruciating one-
sided head pain located behind an eye or near the temple.
Secondary symptoms include eye tearing,nasal congestion,
and a runny nose.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
Prevention order affecting platelet production or one of the many
steps in the entire process can disrupt clotting.
Avoiding triggers, adhering to medical treatment,
Coagulation disorders arise from different causes
and controlling stress can help ward off some cluster
and produce different complications. Some common
headaches.
coagulation disorders are:
•Hemophilia,or hemophilia A (Factor VIII deficiency),
Resources
an inherited coagulation disorder,affects about 20,000
PERIODICALS Americans. This genetic disorder is carried by females
Diamond,Seymour. “Cluster Headache:How to Distinguish but most often affects males.
from Migraine.”Consultant,36,no. 7 (1996):1449.
•Christmas disease,also known as hemophilia B or Fac-
Lewis,Todd A.,and Glen D. Solomon. “Advances in Cluster
Headache Management.”Cleveland Clinic Journal of tor IX deficiency, is less common than hemophilia A
Medicine63,no. 4 (1996):237. with similar in symptoms.
•Disseminated intravascular coagulation disorder,also
ORGANIZATIONS
known as consumption coagulopathy,occurs as a result
American Council for Headache Education (ACHE). 19 Man-
of other diseases and conditions. This disease acceler-
tua Road,Mt. Royal,NJ 08061. (800) 255-2243. <http://
www.achenet.org>. ates clotting,which can actually cause hemorrhage.
National Headache Foundation. 428 W. St. James Place,Chicago, •Thrombocytopenia is the most common cause of
IL 60614. (800) 843-2256. <http://www.headaches.org>.
coagulation disorder. It is characterized by a lack of cir-
culating platelets in the blood. This disease also
Julia Barrett
includes idiopathic thrombocytopenia.
•Von Willebrand’s disease is a hereditary disorder with
CMV see Cytomegalovirus infection
prolonged bleeding timedue to a clotting factor defi-
CNS depressants see Central nervous ciency and impaired platelet function. It is the most
system depressants common hereditary coagulation disorder.
CNS stimulants see Central nervous system •Hypoprothrombinemia is a congenital deficiency of
clotting factors that can lead to hemorrhage.
stimulants
•Other coagulation disorders include Factor XI deficien-
cy,also known as hemophilia C,and Factor VII defi-
ciency. Hemophilia C afflicts one in 100,000 people
and is the second most common bleeding disorder
among women. Factor VII is also called serum pro-
Coagulation disorders thrombin conversion accelerator (SPCA) deficiency.
One in 500,000 people may be afflicted with this disor-
Definition der that is often diagnosed in newborns because of
bleeding into the brain as a result of traumatic delivery.
Coagulation disorders deal with disruption of the
body’s ability to control blood clotting. The most com-
monly known coagulation disorder is hemophilia,a con- Causes and symptoms
dition in which patients bleed for long periods of time
Some coagulation disorders present symptoms such
before clotting. There are other coagulation disorders
as severe bruising. Others will show no apparent symp-
with a variety of causes.
toms,but carry the threat of severe internal bleeding.
Description Hemophilia
Coagulation, or clotting, occurs as a complex Because of its hereditary nature,hemophilia A may
process involving several components of the blood. Plas- be suspected before symptoms occur. Some signs of
ma,the fluid component of the blood,carries a number hemophilia A are numerous large,deep bruisesand pain
of proteins and coagulation factors that regulate bleed- and swelling of joints caused by internal bleeding.
ing. Platelets,small colorless fragments in the blood,ini- Patients with hemophilia do not bleed faster,just longer.
tiate contraction of damaged blood vessels so that less A person with mild hemophilia may first discover the
blood is lost. They also help plug damaged blood vessels disorder with prolonged bleeding following a surgical
and work with plasma to accelerate blood clotting. A dis- procedure. If there is bleeding into the neck, head, or
826 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sredrosid
noitalugaoC
digestive tract, or bleeding from an injury, emergency
measures may be required. KEY TERMS
Mild and severe hemophilia A are inherited through
a complex genetic system that passes a recessive gene on Clotting factor—Also known as coagulation fac-
the female chromosome. Women usually do not show tors. Proteins in the plasma which serve to activate
signs of hemophilia but are carriers of the disease. Each various parts of the blood clotting process by
male child of the carrier has a 50% chance of having being transformed from inactive to active form.
hemophilia,and each female child has a 50% chance of Enzyme—A substance that causes a chemical
passing the gene on. reaction, usually a protein. Enzymes are secreted
by cells.
Christmas disease
Hemorrhage—Abnormal bleeding from the blood
Christmas disease,or hemophilia B,is also heredi- vessels.
tary but less common than hemophilia A. The severity of Heparin—An anticoagulant, or blood clot “dis-
Christmas disease varies from mild to severe,although solver.”
mild cases are more common. The severity depends on
Idiopathic—Refers to a disease of unknown cause,
the degree of deficiency of the Factor IX (clotting factor).
and sometime to a primary disease.
Hemophilia B symptoms are similar to those of hemo-
philia A, including numerous, large, and deep bruises Metastatic—The term used to describe a sec-
and prolonged bleeding. The more dangerous symptoms ondary cancer, or one that has spread from one
are those that represent possible internal bleeding,such area of the body to another.
as swelling of joints, or bleeding into internal organs Serum reagents—Serum is fluid, or the fluid portion
upon trauma. Hemophilia most often occurs in families of the blood retained after removal of the blood
with a known history of the disease, but occasionally, cells and fibrin clot. Reagents are substances added
new cases will occur in families with no apparent history. to the serum to produce a chemical reaction.
Thrombosis—Formation of a clot in the blood that
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
either blocks, or partially blocks a blood vessel.
The name of this disorder arises from the fact that The thrombus may lead to infarction, or death of
malfunction of clotting factors cause platelets to clot in tissue, due to a blocked blood supply.
small blood vessels throughout the body. This action leads
to a lack of clotting factors and platelets at a site of injury
that requires clotting. Patients with disseminated intravas-
cular coagulation (DIC) will bleed abnormally even tors. Severe head trauma can expose blood to brain tissue.
though there is no history of coagulation abnormality. No matter the cause of DIC,the results are a malfunction
Symptoms may include minute spots of hemorrhage on of thrombin (an enzyme) and prothrombin (a glycopro-
the skin, and purple patches or hematomas caused by tein), which activate the fibrinolytic system, releasing
bleeding in the skin. A patient may bleed from surgery or clotting factors in the blood. DIC can alternate from hem-
intravenous injection (IV) sites. Related symptoms include orrhage to thrombosis,and both can exist,which further
vomiting, seizures, coma, shortness of breath, shock, complicates diagnosis and treatment.
severe pain in the back,muscles,abdomen,or chest.
Thrombocytopenia
DIC is not a hereditary disorder or a common one. It
is most commonly caused by complications during preg- Thrombocytopenia may be acquired or congenital. It
nancy or delivery, overwhelming infections, acute represents a defective or decreased production of
leukemia,metastatic cancer,extensive burnsand trauma, platelets. Symptoms include sudden onset of small spots
and even snakebites. There are a number of other causes of hemorrhage on the skin, or bleeding into mucous
of DIC,and it is not commonly understood why or how membranes (such as nosebleeds). The disorder may also
these various disorders can lead to the coagulation prob- be evident as blood in vomit or stools,bleeding during
lem. What the underlying causes of DIC have in common surgery, or heavy menstrual flow in women. Some
is some factor that affects proteins,platelets,or other clot- patients show none of these symptoms,but complain of
ting factors and processes. For example,uterine tissue can fatigueand general weakness. There are several causes
enter the mother’s circulation during prolonged labor, of thrombocytopenia,which is more commonly acquired
introducing foreign proteins into the blood,or the venom as a result of another disorder. Common underlying dis-
of some exotic snakes can activate one of the clotting fac- orders include leukemia,drug toxicity,or aplastic ane-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 827
Coagulation
disorders
mia,all of which lead to decreased or defective produc- diseases. In addition to blood tests,physicians will com-
tion of platelets in the bone marrow. Other diseases may plete a medical history and physical examination. In the
destroy platelets outside the marrow. These include case of acquired coagulation disorders,information such
severe infection,disseminated intravascular coagulation, as prior or current diseases and medications will be
and cirrhosisof the liver. The idiopathic form most com- important in determining the cause of the blood disorder.
monly occurs in children,and is most likely the result of
•Hemohilia A will be diagnosed with laboratory tests
production of antibodies that cause destruction of
detecting presence of clotting factor VIII,factor IX,and
platelets in the spleen and to a lesser extent the liver.
others, as well as the presence or absence of clotting
Von Willebrand’s disease is caused by a defect in the factor inhibitors.
Von Willebrand clotting factor,often accompanied by a
•Christmas disease will be checked against normal
deficiency of Factor VIII as well. It is a hereditary disor-
bleeding and clotting time, as well as for abnormal
der that affects both males and females. In rare cases,it
serum reagents in factor IX deficiency. Other tests of
may be acquired. Symptoms include easy bruising,bleed-
prothrombin timeand thromboplastic generation may
ing in small cuts that stops and starts,abnormal bleeding
also be ordered.
after surgery,and abnormally heavy menstrual bleeding.
•There is no one test or group of tests that can always
Nosebleeds and blood in the stool with a black, tarlike
make (or exclude) a diagnosis of DIC. DIC can be diag-
appearance are also signs of Von Willebrand’s disease.
nosed through a number of laboratory tests which mea-
sure concentration of platelets and fibrinogen in the
Hypoprothrombinemia
blood with normal counts and prolonged prothrombin
This disorder is a deficiency in prothrombin,or Factor
time. Other supportive data include diminished levels
II,a glycoprotein formed and stored in the liver. Prothrom-
of factors V,fibrinogen,and VIII,decreased hemoglo-
bin,under the right conditions,is converted to thrombin,
bin,and others. Since many of the test results also indi-
which activates fibrin and begins the process of coagula-
cate other disorders, the physician may have to put
tion. Some patients may show no symptoms,and others
together several results to reach a diagnosis of DIC.
will suffer severe hemorrhaging. Patients may experience
Serial tests may also be recommended,because a single
easy bruising,profuse nosebleeds,postpartum hemorrhage,
examine at one moment in time may not reveal the
excessively prolonged or heavy menstrual bleeding,and
process that is occurring.
postsurgical hemorrhage. Hypoprothrombinemia may also
•Tests for thrombocytopenia include coagulation tests
be acquired rather than inherited,and usually results from a
revealing a decreased platelet count,prolonged bleed-
Vitamin K deficiencycaused by liver diseases,newborn
ing time,and other measurements. If these tests indi-
hemorrhagic disease,or a number of other factors.
cate that platelet destruction is causing the disorder,the
physician may order bone marrow examination.
Other coagulation disorders
•Von Willebrand’s disease will be diagnosed with the
Factor XI deficiency,or hemophilia C,occurs more
assistance of laboratory tests which show prolonged
frequently among certain ethnic groups,with an incidence
bleeding time,absent or reduced levels of factor VIII,
of about one in 10,000 among Ashkenazi Jews. Nearly
normal platelet count,and others.
50% of patients with this disorder experience no symp-
toms, but others may notice blood in their urine, nose- •Hypothrombinemia is diagnosed with history informa-
bleeds,or bruising. Although joint bleeding seldom occurs, tion and the use of tests that measure vitamin K defi-
some factor XI patients will experience bleeding long after ciency,deficiency of prothrombin,and clotting factors
an injury occurs. Some women will experience prolonged V,VII,IX,and X.
bleeding after childbirth. Patients with factor VII deficien-
•Factor XI deficiency is diagnosed most often after
cy vary greatly in their bleeding severity. Women may
injury-related bleeding. Blood tests can help pinpoint
experience heavy menstrual bleeding,bleeding from the
factor VII deficiency.
gums or nose,bleeding deep within the skin,and episodes
of bleeding into the stomach,intestine,and urinary tract.
Treatment
Factor VII patients may also suffer bleeding into joints.
In mild cases, treatment may involve the use of
drugs that stimulate the release of deficient clotting fac-
Diagnosis
tors. In severe cases,bleeding may only stop if the clot-
Several blood tests can be used to detect various ting factor that is missing is replaced through infusion of
coagulation disorders. There are hundreds of different donated human blood in the form of fresh frozen plasma
tests a doctor can order to look for indications of specific or cryoprecipitate.
828 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sredrosid
noitalugaoC
•Hemophilia A in mild episodes may require infusion of patients may be treated with prothrombin complex con-
a drug called desmopressin or DDAVP. Severe bleeding centrates. As of early 1998,factor VII concentrate was
episodes will require transfusions of human blood clot- not licensed in the United States and could only be used
ting factors. Hemophiliacs are encouraged to receive with special permission.
physical therapy to help damaged joints and to exercise
in non-contact sports such as swimming,bicycle riding, Alternative treatment
or walking.
This can be a very severe condition and should be
•Christmas disease patients are treated similarly to managed by a practitioner of alternative medicine in con-
hemophilia A patients. There are commercial products junction with a medical doctor; this condition should not
and human blood products available to provide coagu- be self managed. For patients known to suffer from hemo-
lation. Cryoprecipitate was invented in 1965 to replace philia A or B and other bleeding disorders,avoidance of
the need for whole plasma transfusions, which intro- activities that can cause severe injury should be practiced.
duced more volume than needed. By the 1970s,people Comprehensive care addresses the whole person by help-
were able to infuse themselves with freeze-dried clot- ing to deal with the psychosocial aspects of the disease.
ting factor. Superficial woundscan be cleaned and ban-
daged. Parents of hemophiliac children receiving Prognosis
immunizations should inform the vaccinationprovider
The prognosis for patients with mild forms of coag-
in advance to decrease the possibility of bleeding prob-
ulation disorders is normally good. Many people can
lems. These children should probably not receive injec-
lead a normal life and maintain a normal life expectancy.
tions which go into the muscle.
Without treatment of bleeding episodes,severe muscle
•Treatment for disseminated intravascular coagulation and joint pain,and eventually,damage,can occur. Any
patients is complicated by the large variety of underly- incident that causes blood to collect in the head,neck,or
ing causes of the disorder. If at all possible,the physi- digestive system can be very serious and requires imme-
cian will first treat this underlying disorder. If the diate attention. DIC can be severe enough to cause clots
patient is not already bleeding, this supportive treat- to form and a stroke could occur. DIC is also serious
ment may eliminate the DIC. However,if bleeding is enough to cause gangrenein the fingers,nose,or geni-
occurring,the patient may need blood,platelets,fresh tals. The prognosis depends on early intervention and
frozen plasma, or other blood products. Heparin has treatment of the underlying condition. Hemorrhage from
been controversial in treating DIC,but it is often used a coagulation disorder, particularly into the brain or
as a last resort to stop hemorrhage. Heparin has not digestive track,can prove fatal. In the past,patients who
proven useful in treating patients with DIC resulting received regular transfusions of human blood products
from heat stroke, exotic snakebites, trauma, mis- were subject to increased risk of AIDS and other dis-
matched transfusions, and acute problems resulting eases. However,efforts have been made since the early
from obstetrical complications. 1990s to ensure the safety of the blood supply.
•Secondary acquired thrombocytopenia is best alleviated
by treating the underlying cause or disorder. The specif- Prevention
ic treatment may depend on the underlying cause.
Prevention of coagulation disorders varies. Acquired
Sometimes,cortocoosterids or immune globulin may
disorders may only be prevented by preventing onset of the
be given to improve platelet production.
underlying disorder (such as cirrhosis). Hereditary disor-
•Von Willebrand’s disease is treated by several methods ders can be predicted with prenatal testing and genetic
to reduce bleeding time and to replace factor VIII, counseling. Prevention of severe bleeding episodes may be
which consequently will replace the Von Willebrand accomplished by refraining from activities that could cause
factor. This may include infusion of cryoprecipitate or injury,such as contact sports. Open communication with
fresh frozen plasma. Desmopressin may also help raise healthcare providers prior to procedures or tests that could
levels of the Von Willebrand factor. cause bleeding may prevent a severe bleeding incident.
•Hypoprothrombinemia may be treated with concen-
trates of prothrombin. Vitamin K may also be produced, Resources
and in bleeding episodes,the patient may receive fresh
BOOKS
plasma products. Bellenir,Karen. Genetic Disorders Sourcebook.Omnigraphics,
Inc.,1995.
•Factor XI (hemophilia C) is most often treated with
plasma,since there are no commercially available con- PERIODICALS
centrates of factor XI in the United States. Factor VII Community Alert.New York:National Hemophilia Foundation.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 829
Coagulation
disorders
ORGANIZATIONS Among the consequences of coarctation of the aorta is
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105, ventricular hypertrophy,an enlarging of the left ventricle
Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http:// in response to the increased back pressure of the blood
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>. and the demand for more blood by the body. Symptoms
National Hemophilia Foundation. 116 West 32nd St.,11th in infants include shortness of breath(dyspnea),diffi-
Floor,New York,NY 10001. 800-424-2634. <http://www.
culty in feeding, and poor weight gain. Older children
hemophilia.org/home.htm>.
usually don’t have symptoms,but may display fatigue,
shortness of breath,or a feeling of lameness in their legs.
Teresa Norris,RN
Coagulopathies see Coagulation disorders Diagnosis
Coal miner’s disease see Black lung disease Infants usually have an abnormal “gallop” heart
rhythm and may also have heart murmurs. Sometimes
Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis see Black
excessive arterial pulses can be seen in the carotid and
lung disease
suprasternal notch arteries,indicating increased pressure
in these arteries,while the femoral pulse is weak or can’t
be detected. The systolic pressure is higher in the arms
than in the legs. Enlargement of the heart can be seen in x
rays. Similar symptoms are seen in older children and
Coarctation of the aorta adults. A 10 mm Hg (mercury) pressure difference
between the upper and lower extremities is diagnostic for
Definition coarctation of the aorta. For some patients,the systolic
pressure difference is observed only during exercise.
A defect that develops in the fetus in which there is a
Infants frequently have an abnormal electrocardiogram
narrowing of the aortic arch, the main blood artery that
(ECG) that indicates that the right or both ventricles are
delivers blood from the left ventricle of the heart to the rest
enlarged,while in older children the ECG may be normal
of the body. Coarctation of the aorta is diagnosed in both
or show that the left ventricle is enlarged. The coarctation
newborns and adults. Approximately 10% of newborns with
may be detected in echocardiographic examination.
congenital heart diseasehave coarctation of the aorta.
Description Treatment
Blood leaves the heart by way of the left ventricle Drugs can be used to treat the hypertension and
and is distributed to the body by arteries. The aortic arch heart failure. Surgery is recommended for infants with
is the first artery to carry blood as it leaves the heart. other,associated cardiac defects and for those infants not
Other arteries to the head and arms branch off the aortic responding to drug therapy. Surgery is indicated for
arch. A narrowing of the aorta at any spot produces resis- infants that don’t require immediate surgery, but who
tance to the flow of blood. This causes high blood pres- develop severe hypertension during the first several
sure before the narrowing and low pressure below the nar- months of life. Patients are advised to avoid vigorous
rowing (downstream). Parts of the body supplied by arter- exercise prior to surgical correction of the coarctation.
ies that branch off the aortic arch before the narrowing Recoarctation can occur in some patients, even if they
have high blood pressure,while most of the lower body have had surgery.
doesn’t receive enough blood supply. To compensate for
this,the heart works harder,and the blood pressure rises.
Prognosis
Approximately half of all infants with coarctation of
the aorta are diagnosed within the first two months of Approximately half of all infants diagnosed with
life. Frequently,there are other congenital cardiac com- coarctation of the aorta have no other cardiac defects and
plications present. Infants with Turner syndromehave a will respond well to medical management. Most of these
45% rate of also having coarctation. There is evidence children will eventually outgrow the condition after sev-
that some cases of coarctation may be inherited. eral years of life. Although their hypertension may
increase for several months early in life,it will eventually
decrease as the circulatory system develops. Surgery is
Causes and symptoms
required for infants that have severe coarctation of the
In newborns with congenital heart disease,coarcta- aorta or have associated cardiac defects. The average life
tion of the aorta develops while the baby is in the womb. span of children who have coarctation of the aorta is 34
830 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
atroa
eht
fo
noitatcraoC
“toot.”It is most commonly inhaled or “snorted.”It may
KEY TERMS also be dissolved in water and injected.
Crack is a smokable form of cocaine that produces
Dyspnea—Difficulty in breathing. Usually associ- an immediate and more intense high. It comes in off-
ated with heart or lung diseases. white chunks or chips called “rocks.” Little crumbs of
Electrocardiogram—A graph of the heart’s beating crack are sometimes called “kibbles & bits.”
produced by an instrument that detects the electri- In addition to their stand-alone use,both cocaine and
cal signals made by the heart. crack are often mixed with other substances. Cocaine
may be mixed with methcathinone (a more recent drug of
abuse,known as “cat,”that is similar to methampheta-
mine) to create a “wildcat.”A hollowed-out cigar filled
years of age. The most common complications for chil- with a mixture of crack and marijuana is known as a
dren who have not had surgery are hypertension,aortic “woolah.”And either cocaine or crack used in conjunc-
rupture,intracranial bleeding,and congestive heart fail- tion with heroin is called a “speedball.” Cocaine used
ure. Women who have an uncorrected coarctation of the together with alcohol represents the most common fatal
aorta have a mortality rate of 10% during pregnancyand two-drug combination.
a 90% rate of complications.
History
Resources
Cocaine is one of the oldest known psychoactive
BOOKS drugs. Coca leaves,the source of cocaine,were used by
Alexander,R. W.,R. C. Schlant,and V. Fuster,eds. The Heart. the Incas and other inhabitants of the Andean region of
9th ed. New York:McGraw-Hill,1998.
South America for thousands of years,both as a stimu-
Berkow,Robert,ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information.
lant and to depress appetite and combat apoxia (altitude
Whitehouse Station,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,
sickness).
1997.
Despite the long history of coca leaf use,it was not
John T. Lohr,PhD until the latter part of the nineteenth century that the
active ingredient of the plant,cocaine hydrochloride,was
first extracted from those leaves. The new drug soon
became a common ingredient in patent medicines and
other popular products (including the original formula
Cocaine for Coca-Cola). This widespread use quickly raised con-
cerns about the drug’s negative effects. In the early
Definition 1900s, several legislative steps were taken to address
those concerns; the Harrison Act of 1914 banned the use
Cocaine is a highly addictive central nervous system
of cocaine and other substances in non-prescription prod-
stimulant extracted from the leaves of the coca plant,
ucts. In the wake of those actions,cocaine use declined
Erythroxylon coca.
substantially.
The drug culture of the 1960s sparked renewed
Description
interest in cocaine. With the advent of crack in the 1980s,
In its most common form,cocaine is a whitish crys- use of the drug had once again become a national prob-
talline powder that produces feelings of euphoria when lem. Cocaine use declined significantly during the early
ingested. 1990s,but it remains a significant problem and is on the
increase in certain geographic areas and among certain
Now classified as a Schedule II drug, cocaine has
age groups.
legitimate medical uses as well as a long history of recre-
ational abuse. Administered by a licensed physician,the
drug can be used as a local anesthetic for certain eye and Causes and symptoms
ear problems and in some kinds of surgery.
As with other forms of addiction,cocaine abuse is
the result of a complex combination of internal and
Forms of the drug
external factors. Genetic predisposition,family history,
In powder form, cocaine is known by such street and immediate environment can all affect a person’s
names as “coke,” “blow,” “C,” “flake,” “snow” and probability of becoming addicted.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 831
Cocaine
As many as three to four million people are estimat- effects on the developing fetus and,since then,several
ed to be chronic cocaine users. The 1997 National research reports have suggested that prenatal cocaine use
Household Survey on Drug Abuse reported an estimated could be associated to a wide range of fetal, newborn,
600,000 current crack users, showing no significant and child development problems. According to the The
change since the late 1980s. Lindesmith Center-Drug Policy Foundation, many of
these early reports had methodological flaws,and most
How cocaine affects the brain researchers nowadays propose more cautious conclu-
sions concerning prenatal cocaine effects. Much evi-
Extensive research has been conducted to determine
dence would seem to point to the lack of quality prenatal
how cocaine works on the brain and why it is so addictive.
care and the use of alcohol and tobacco as primary fac-
Cocaine has been found to affect an area of the brain
tors in poor fetal development among pregnant cocaine
known as the ventral tegmental area (VTA),which con-
users. Research sponsored by the National Institute on
nects with the nucleus accumbens,a major pleasure cen-
Drug Abuse (NIDA) and the Albert Einstein Medical
ter. Like other commonly abused addictive drugs,
Center in Philadelphia corroborate the Lindensmith Cen-
cocaine’s effects are related to the action of the neuro-
ter findings in reporting that the lack of quality prenatal
transmitter dopamine,which carries information between
care is associated with undesirable effects often attrib-
neurons. Cocaine interferes with the normal functioning
uted to cocaine exposure such as prematurity,low birth
of neurons by blocking the re-uptake of dopamine,which
weight,and fetal or infant death. The Center for Disease
builds up in the synapses and is believed to cause the
Control and Prevention (CDC) however, reports that
pleasurable feelings reported by cocaine users.
mothers who use cocaine early in pregnancy are five
times as likely to have a baby with a malformation of the
Short-term effects of use
urinary tract as mothers who do not use the drug. Thus,
The short-term effects of cocaine can include: cocaine use during pregnancy is assuredly most inadvis-
able,especially since it is also often associated with the
•rapid heartbeat
use of alcohol known to cause long-term developmental
•constricted blood vessels problems. Supporting the cocaine-exposed expecting
mother so as to discourage cocaine use remains an
•dilated pupils
important task for all health caregivers.
•increased temperature
•increased energy
Diagnosis
•reduced appetite
Diagnosing cocaine addiction can be difficult.
•increased sense of alertness
Many of the signs of short-term cocaine use are not
•euphoria obvious. Since cocaine users often also use other drugs,
it may not be easy to distinguish the effects of one drug
•deathdue to overdose
from another.
Long-term effects of use Cocaine use has been documented in significant
numbers of eighth graders as well as older teens. Over all
The long-term effects of cocaine and crack use
age groups, more men than women use the drug. The
include:
highest rate of cocaine use is found among adults 18 to
•dependence,addiction 25 years old.
•irritability
Medical complications
•mood swings
Cocaine has been linked to several serious health
•restlessness
problems,including:
•weight loss
•arrhythmia
•auditory hallucinations
•heart attacks
•paranoia
•chest pain
Cocaine use and pregnancy •respiratory failure
•strokes
The rise in cocaine use as well as the appearance of
crack cocaine in the late 1980s spurred fears about its •seizures
832 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
eniacoC
Other complications may vary depending on how
the drug is administered. Prolonged snorting,for exam- KEY TERMS
ple,can irritate the nasal septum,producing nosebleeds,
chronic runny nose, and other problems. Intravenous Apoxia—Apoxia refers to altitude sickness.
users face an increased risk of infectious diseases such as
Arrhythmia—Irregular heartbeat.
HIV/AIDS and hepatitis.
Central nervous system—Part of the nervous sys-
Testing tem consisting of the brain, cranial nerves and
spinal cord. The brain is the center of higher
Drug testing can be useful in diagnosing and treating
processes, such as thought and emotion and is
cocaine abuse. Urine testing can detect cocaine; besides
responsible for the coordination and control of
providing an objective alternative to reliance on what a
bodily activities and the interpretation of informa-
patient says,such tests can also be used as a follow-up to
tion from the senses. The cranial nerves and spinal
treatment to confirm that the patient has remained drug-free.
cord link the brain to the peripheral nervous sys-
tem, that is the nerves present in the rest of body.
Treatment Nasal septum—The membrane that separates the
nostrils.
The last two decades have seen a dramatic rise in the
number of cocaine addicts seeking treatment. But like all Neurotransmitter—A chemical that carries nerve
forms of drug abuse,cocaine abuse/addiction is a multi- impulses across a synapse.
faceted phenomenon involving environmental, social,
Synapse—The gap between two nerve cells.
and familial as well as physiological factors. This greatly
complicates the challenge of effectively treating cocaine
addiction.
Alternative treatment
Pharmacological treatments
Various alternative or complementary approaches
To date,no medications have been approved specifi- have been used in treating cocaine addiction, often in
cally for treating cocaine addiction. But several were combination with more conventional therapies. In Japan,
under development at this writing. Selegeline,delivered the herb acorus has been traditionally used both to assist
either via a time-release pill or a transdermal patch, early-stage cocaine withdrawal and in later recovery
shows promise as a possible anti-cocaine medication. stages. Other herbs sometimes used to treat drug addic-
Clinical studies have shown the drug disulfiram (also tions of various kinds include kola nut,guarana seed and
used to treat alcoholics) to be effective in treating yohimbe (to boost short-term energy),and valerian root,
cocaine abusers. In addition,antidepressant medications hops leaf, scullcap leaf, and chamomile (to calm the
are sometimes used to control the mood swings associat- patient). The amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine
ed with the early stages of cocaine withdrawal. have been used to reduce cocaine addicts’craving for the
drug,and vitamin therapy may be used to help strengthen
Behavioral approaches the patient. Gentle massage has been used to help infants
born with congenital cocaine addiction. Other tech-
A wide range of behavioral interventions have been
niques, such as acupuncture, EEG biofeedback, and
successfully used to treat cocaine addiction. The
visualization,may also be useful in treating addiction.
approach used must be tailored to the specific needs of
each individual patient,however.
Prognosis
Contingency management rewards drug abstinence
(confirmed by urine testing) with points or vouchers Because addiction involves so many different factors,
which patients can exchange for such things as an prospects for individual addicts vary widely. However,
evening out or membership in a gym. Cognitive-behav- research has consistently shown that treatment can signifi-
ioral therapyhelps users learn to recognize and avoid cantly reduce both drug abuse and subsequent criminal
situations most likely to lead to cocaine use and to devel- activity. The comprehensive Services Research Outcomes
op healthier ways to cope with stressful situations. Resi- Study (1998) found a 45% drop in cocaine use five years
dential programs/therapeutic communities may also be after treatment,compared to use during the five years before
helpful,particularly in more severe cases. Patients typi- treatment. The study also found that females generally
cally spend six to 12 months in such programs, which respond better to treatment than males,and older patients
may also include vocational training and other features. tend to reduce their drug use more than younger patients.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 833
Cocaine
Some research also supports the idea that 12-step injured areas that can fill with pus (abscesses). Dissemi-
programs used in conjunction with other approaches can nated coccidioidomycosis describes the type of coccid-
significantly enhance the prospects for a positive out- ioidomycosis that spreads throughout the body affecting
come. One study of people in outpatient drug-treatment many organ systems and is often fatal.
programs found that participation in a 12-step program
nearly doubled their chances of remaining drug-free. Description
Coccidioidomycosis is an airborne infection. The
Prevention fungus that causes the disease is found in the dry desert
soil of the southwestern United States,Mexico,and Cen-
Despite significant variation over time, cocaine
tral and South America. Coccidioidomycosis is some-
addiction has proven to be a persistent public health prob-
times called San Joaquin fever, valley fever, or desert
lem. Interdiction and source control are expensive and
fever because of its prevalence in the farming valleys of
have failed to eliminate the problem, and some law
California. Although commonly acquired,overt coccid-
enforcement officials are now recommending more
ioidomycosis is a rare disease. Chronic infections occur
emphasis on demand reduction through education and
in only one out of every 100,000 people.
other measures to address the causes of cocaine addiction.
Although anyone can get coccidioidomycosis,farm
Resources laborers,construction workers,and archaeologists who
work where it is dusty are at greater risk to become
BOOKS
infected. People of any age can get coccidioidomycosis,
Gold,Mark S. Cocaine (and Crack):Clinical Aspects (181-
but the disease most commonly occurs in the 25–55 age
198),Substance Abuse:A Comprehensive Textbook.Balti-
group. In its acute form,coccidioidomycosis infects men
more:Williams & Wilkins,1997.
and women equally.
PERIODICALS
Chronic and disseminated forms of coccidioidomy-
Avants,S. Kelly. “A Randomized Controlled Trial of Auricular
cosis occur more frequently in men and pregnant women.
Acupuncture for Cocaine Dependence.”JAMA(22
November 2000). Although it is not clear why,people of color are 10-20
Harvey,John A.,and Barry Kosofsky,eds. “Cocaine:Effects times more likely to develop the disseminated form of
on the Developing Brain.”Annals of the New York Acade- the disease than caucasians. People who have a weak-
my of Sciences846 (1998). ened immune system (immunocompromised), either
LeDuff,Charlie. “Cocaine Quietly Reclaims Its Hold as Good from diseases such as AIDSor leukemia,or as the result
Times Return.”New York Times(21 August 2000):2. of medications that suppressed the immune system (cor-
Goode,Erica. “Acupuncture Helps Some Quell Need for
ticosteroids,chemotherapy),are more likely to develop
Cocaine.”New York Times(15 August 2000):D7.
disseminated coccidioidomycosis.
ORGANIZATIONS
Cocaine Anonymous. 6125 Washington Blvd. Suite 202,Cul-
Causes and symptoms
ver City,CA 90232. (800) 347-8998.
Nar-Anon Family Group Headquarters,Inc. P.O. Box 2562, When the spores of C. immitisare inhaled,they can
Palos Verdes Peninsula,CA 90274. (310) 547-5800. become lodged in the lungs,divide,and cause localized
inflammation. This is known as acute or primary coccid-
Peter Gregutt ioidomycosis. The disease is not spread from one person
to another. Approximately 60% of people who are infect-
ed exhibit no symptoms (asymptomatic). In the other
40%, symptoms appear 10–30 days after exposure.
These symptoms include a fever which can reach 104°F
Coccidioidomycosis (39.5°C),dry cough,chest pains,joint and muscle aches,
headache,and weight loss. About two weeks after the
Definition start of the fever,some people develop a painful red rash
or lumps on the lower legs. Symptoms usually disappear
Coccidioidomycosis is an infection caused by inhal-
without treatment in about one month. People who have
ing the microscopic spores of the fungus Coccidioides
been infected gain partial immunity to reinfection.
immitis. Spores are the tiny,thick-walled structures that
fungi use to reproduce. Coccidioidomycosis exists in The chronic form of coccidioidomycosis normally
three forms. The acute form produces flu-like symptoms. occurs after a long latent period of 20 or more years dur-
The chronic form can develop as many as 20 years after ing which the patient experiences no symptoms of the
initial infection and,in the lungs,can produce inflamed, disease. In the chronic phase,coccidioidomycosis causes
834 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisocymodioidiccoC
lung abscesses that rupture,spilling pus and fluid into the
lungs, and causing serious damage to the lungs. The KEY TERMS
patient experiences difficulty breathing and has a fever,
chest pain,and other signs of pneumonia. Medical treat- Abscess—An area of inflamed and injured body
ment is essential for recovery. tissue that fills with pus.
In its disseminated form, coccidioidomycosis
Acidophilus—The bacteria Lactobacillus aci-
spreads to other parts of the body including the liver,
dophilus that usually found in yogurt.
bones, skin, brain, heart, and lining around the heart
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the
(pericardium). Symptoms include fever,joint pain,loss
immune system in response to a specific foreign
of appetite,weight loss,night sweats,skin lesions,and
protein or particle called an antigen.
difficulty breathing. Also, in 30–50% of patients with
disseminated coccidioidomycosis,the tissue coverings of Antigen—A foreign protein to which the body
the brain and spinal cord become inflamed (meningitis). reacts by making antibodies.
Asymptomatic—Persons who carry a disease but
Diagnosis who do not exhibit symptoms of the disease are
Many cases of coccidioidomycosis go undiagnosed said to be asymptomatic.
because the symptoms resemble those of common viral Bifidobacteria—A group of bacteria normally pre-
diseases. However,a skin test similar to that for tubercu- sent in the intestine. Commercial supplements
losiswill determine whether a person has been infected. containing these bacteria are available.
The test is simple and accurate,but it does not indicate
Corticosteroids—A group of hormones produced
whether the disease was limited to its acute form or if it
naturally by the adrenal gland or manufactured syn-
has progressed to its chronic form.
thetically. They are often used to treat inflammation.
Diagnosis of chronic or disseminated coccidioidomy-
Examples include cortisone and prednisone.
cosis is made by culturing a sample of sputum or other
Immunocompromised—A state in which the
body fluids in the laboratory to isolate the fungus. A blood
immune system is suppressed or not functioning
serum test is used to detect the presence of an antibody pro-
properly.
duced in response to C. immitisinfection. Chest x rays are
often used to assess lung damage,but alone cannot lead to Meningitis—An inflammation of the membranes
a definitive diagnosis of coccidioidomycosis because other surrounding the brain or spinal cord.
diseases can produce similar results on the x ray.
Pericardium—The tissue sac around the heart.
Treatment
In most cases of acute coccidioidomycosis, the
body’s own immune system is adequate to bring about ufacturer of the drug,has established a financial assis-
recovery without medical intervention. Fever and pain tance plan to make the drug available at lower cost to
can be treated with non-prescription drugs. those who meet certain criteria. Patients needing this
drug should ask their doctors about this program.
Chronic and disseminated coccidioidomycosis,how-
ever,are serious diseases that require treatment with pre-
scription drugs. Patients with intact immune systems who Alternative treatment
develop chronic coccidiodomycosis are treated with the
Alternative treatment for fungal infections focuses
drug ketoconazole (Nizoral) or amphotericin B (Fungi-
on creating an internal environment where the fungus
zone). Patients with suppressed immune systems are treat-
cannot survive. This is accomplished by eating a diet low
ed with amphotericin B (Fungizone). Amphotericin B is a
in dairy products,sugars,including honey and fruit juice,
powerful fungistatic drug with potentially toxic side
and foods like beer that contain yeast. This is comple-
effects. As a result,hospitalization is required in order to
mented by a diet consisting,in large part,of uncooked
monitor patients. The patient may also receive other drugs
and unprocessed foods. Supplements of vitaminsC,E,
to minimize the side effects of the amphotericin B.
A-plus,and B complex may also be useful. Lactobacillus
Patients with AIDS must continue to take itracona- acidophilusand Bifidobacteriumwill replenish the good
zole (Sporonox) or fluconazole (Diflucan) orally or bacteria in the intestines. Antifungal herbs, like garlic
receive weekly intravenous doses of amphotericin B for (Allium sativum), can be consumed in relatively large
the rest of their lives in order to prevent a relapse. does and for an extended period of time in order to
Because of the high cost of fluconazole,Pfizer,the man- increase effectiveness.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 835
Coccidioidomycosis
Prognosis fused vertebrae that connect with the sacrum,a part of
the pelvis.
Most people who are infected with coccidiodomycosis
only suffer from the mild, acute form of the disease and
Description
recover without further complications. Patients who suffer
from chronic coccidiodomycosis and who have no underly- The coccyx consists of fused vertebrae, which are
ing lung or immune system diseases also stand a good not flexible like the other vertebrae of the vertebral col-
change of recovery,although they must be alert to a relapse. umn which are all interspaced by intervertebral disks and
joined together by elastic ligaments. Since the spinal
The picture for patients with the disseminated form of
cord ends just before the coccyx begins,coccygeal verte-
the disease,many of whom have AIDS,is less positive.
brae also lack a central foramen (hole). In the coccyx,the
Untreated disseminated coccidiodomycosis is almost
vertebrae generally fuse together in early adulthood and
always fatal within a short time. With treatment,chance of
may also fuse with the sacrum,the bone located between
survival increases,but the deathrate remains high when
the 5th lumbar vertebra and the coccyx,as a person ages.
meningitis or diffuse lung (pulmonary) disease is present.
In males,the coccyx curves downward,and in females,it
AIDS patients must constantly guard against relapse.
is straighter to allow a baby to pass through the birth
canal without impediment.
Prevention
Painin or around the coccyx is called coccydynia or
Because the fungus that causes coccidioidomycosis coccygodynia. Coccydynia presents a range of symptoms
is airborne and microscopic,the only method of preven- associated to a variety of underlying causes and conditions.
tion is to avoid visiting areas where it is found in the soil.
Unfortunately,for many people this is impractical. Main-
Causes and symptoms
taining general good health and avoiding HIV infection
will limit coccidioidomycosis to the acute and relatively Causes
mild form in most people.
Coccydynia can be caused by a number of factors.
Usually, patients report pain after a fall onto their but-
Resources tocks,as occurs when going down stairs or while skating.
Others have pain during pregnancyor after childbirth.
ORGANIZATIONS
Some experience repetitive strain from rowing or cycling,
American Lung Association. 1740 Broadway,New York,NY
10019. (800) 586-4872. <http://www.lungusa.org>. and some cite anal intercourse as the cause of pain. In
Canadian HIV/AIDS Clearinghouse. 1565 Carling Avenue, many cases,pain derives from a malformation of the coc-
Suite 400,Ottawa,ON K1Z 8R1. (877) 999-7740. <http:// cyx itself. Sometimes bony spurs appear on the coccyx,
www.clearinghouse.cpha.ca/clearinghouse_e.htm>. but only seem to be painful in thin patients who do not
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., have the padding to protect the region from the spur.
NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435,(404) 639-3311.
Other causes of coccydynia include canceror dam-
<http://www.cdc.gov>.
age to the sacrum that generates referred pain,meaning
National Aids Hotline. (800) 342-2437.
Project Inform. 205 13th Street,#2001,San Francisco,CA pain that appears in one region but originates from anoth-
94103. (800) 822-7422. <http://www.projinf.org>. er. Muscle strain or tension,pinched nerves or damaged
nerves,or dislocation of the coccyx due to gross obesity
OTHER
are other causes.
Powderly,William G. “Coccidioidomycosis.”Journal of the
International Association of Physicians in AIDS Care.
Symptoms
Dec. 1996 <http://www.iapac.org>.
The most common symptom of coccydynia, irre-
Tish Davidson spective of the cause of the condition,is pain when sit-
ting,or when rising from a sitting position. If the condi-
tion lasts long enough,the patient may even experience
pain when standing or lying down. Sometimes, numb-
ness occurs in the lower part of the spine. Some patients
Coccyx injuries will experience pain during bowel movements, sexual
intercourse,or menstruation.
Definition
Secondary symptoms include back pain from sitting
The coccyx—or tailbone—is the last bone of the in odd positions in order to relieve pain,and painful feet
vertebral column, and usually consists of three to five from standing too much,because patients avoid sitting.
836 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
seirujni
xyccoC
underlying condition exists of which the pain is a warn-
KEY TERMS ing sign. Nerve blocks and a variety of drugs are other
options to control pain.
Coccyx—The last bone of the spinal column, con- Elimination of the root cause of the pain is ideal.
sisting of three to five fused vertebrae that connect This is done through careful diagnosis and the applica-
with the sacrum, a part of the pelvis. tion of manual treatments,corticosteroid injections into
Coccydynia—Also called coccygodynia. Pain in or the coccyx vertebrae, or surgery. Injections into the
around the coccyx. fourth and fifth sacral nerves and coccygeal nerves often
bring relief, but are considered more as a pain control
Foramen—A small opening, perforation, or orifice.
measure than as curative treatment. Manual treatments
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—An imaging
have not been found to be effective. Surgery is a radical
technique that produces pictures of the inside of
procedure whose indications are inconsistent and depen-
the body.
dent on the subjectivity of the physician.
Sacrum—The triangle-shaped bone located
between the fifth lumbar vertebra and the coccyx
Prognosis
that consists of five vertebrae fused together. The
sacrum joins on each side with the bones of the With current treatment, prognosis is good and
pelvis. patients usually are able to live pain free.
Spinal cord—Elongated nerve bundles that lie in
the vertebral canal and from which the spinal Prevention
nerves emerge.
There probably is no real prevention,expect weight
Vertebrae—Bones in the cervical, thoracic, and
control. Some women may choose to give birth through
lumbar regions of the body that make up the verte-
ceasarian section instead of vaginally after an episode of
bral column. Vertebrae have a central foramen
coccyx pain from a previous delivery.
(hole), and their superposition makes up the verte-
bral canal that encloses the spinal cord.
Resources
Vertebral column—The vertebral column, also
OTHER
called the spinal column or spine, consists of a
Maigne,Jean-Yves. “Treatment Strategies for Coccydynia.”
series of vertebrae connected by ligaments. It pro-
May 7,2001 <http://www.coccyx.org/whatisit.htm>.
vides a supporting axis for the body and protects
“Treatments for Coccydynia.”May 7,2001 <http://www.
the spinal cord. The vertebral column consists of
coccyx.org/treatment.htm>.
seven cervical vertebrae in the neck, followed by “What is Coccydynia?”May 7,2001 <http://www.coccyx.
12 thoracic vertebrae that connect to the ribs, five org/whatisit.htm>.
lumbar vertebrae in the lower back, the sacrum,
and the coccyx. Janie Franz
Sometimes the entire buttocks experience pain. Rarely,
exhaustion,depression,and lack of sleep may occur.
Cochlear implants
Diagnosis Definition
Diagnosis of fracture is usually made by inserting a A cochlear implant is a surgical treatment for hear-
gloved finger in the rectum and pressing on the coccyx. ing lossthat works like an artificial human cochlea in the
X rays and magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) are also inner ear,helping to send sound from the ear to the brain.
often used. Since coccyx pain may be the result of other It is different from a hearing aid,which simply amplifies
factors like cancer, these must be ruled out through a sound.
variety of tests before treatment can begin.
Purpose
Treatment
A cochlear implant bypasses damaged hair cells and
Treatment exists to either control the pain or elimi- helps establish some degree of hearing by stimulating the
nate the cause. Pain control may be dangerous if an hearing (auditory) nerve directly.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 837
Cochlear
implants
As many as 24 electrodes (depending on the type of
implant) carry the impulses that stimulate the hearing
nerve. The brain then interprets the signals as specific
sounds.
Despite the benefits that the implant appears to offer,
some hearing specialists and members of the deaf com-
munity still believe that the benefits may not outweigh
the risks and limitations of the device. Because the
device must be surgically implanted,it carries some sur-
gical risk. Also,manufacturers can’t promise how well a
person will hear with an implant. Moreover,after getting
an implant,some people say they feel alienated from the
Deaf community,while at the same time not feeling fully
a part of the hearing world.
The sounds heard through an implant are different
from the normal hearing sounds, and have been
described as artificial or “robotlike.”This is because the
Precautions implant’s handful of electrodes cannot hope to match the
complexity of a person’s 15,000 hair cells.
Because the implants are controversial,very expen-
sive,and have uncertain results,the U.S. Food and Drug
Surgical procedure
Administration (FDA) has limited the implants to people:
During the procedure,the surgeon makes an incision
•who get no significant benefit from hearing aids
behind the ear and opens the mastoid bone (the ridge on
•who are at least 2 years old (the age at which specialists
the skull behind the ear) leading into the middle ear. The
can verify severity of deafness)
surgeon then places the receiver-stimulator in the bone,
•with severe to profound hearing loss. and gently threads the electrodes into the cochlea. This
operation takes between one and one-half to five hours.
Description
Preparation
Hearing loss is caused by a number of different
problems that occur either in the hearing nerve or parts of Before a person gets an implant, specialists at an
the middle or inner ear. The most common type of deaf- implant clinic conduct a careful evaluation, including
ness is caused by damaged hair cells in the cochlea,the extensive hearing tests to determine how well the candi-
hearing part of the inner ear. Normally,hair cells stimu- date can hear.
late the hearing nerve,which transmits sound signals to
Unfortunately,it is not possible to predict who will
the brain. When hair cells stop functioning,the hearing
benefit from an implant. In general,the later in life a per-
nerve remains unstimulated,and the person can’t hear.
son becomes deaf,and the shorter the duration of deaf-
Hair cells can be destroyed by many things, including
ness,the better the person is likely to understand speech
infection,trauma,loud noise,aging,or birth defects.
with an implant. Likewise,someone with a healthy hearing
All cochlear implants consist of a microphone nerve will do better than someone with a damaged nerve.
worn behind the ear that picks up sound and sends it
First,candidates undergo a trial with a powerful hear-
along a wire to a speech processor,which is worn in a
ing aid. If the aid can’t improve hearing enough,a physi-
small shoulder pouch, pocket, or belt. The processor
cian then performs a physical exam and orders a scan of
boosts the sound, filters out background noise, and
the inner ear (some patients with a scarred cochlea aren’t
turns sound into digital signals before sending it to a
good candidates). A doctor may also order a psychological
transmitter worn behind the ear. A magnet holds the
exam to better understand the person’s expectations.
transmitter in place through its attraction to the
Patients need to be highly motivated,and have a realistic
receiver-stimulator,a part of the device that is surgical-
understanding of what an implant can and cannot do.
ly attached beneath the skin in the skull. The receiver
picks up digital signs forwarded by the transmitter,and
Aftercare
converts them into electrical impulses. These electrical
impulses flow through electrodes contained in a narrow, The patient remains in the hospital for a day or two
flexible tube that has been threaded into the cochlea. after the surgery. After a month,the surgical woundswill
838 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stnalpmi
raelhcoC
A close-up view of a cochlear implant.(Photograph by L.
Steinmark, Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by per-
mission.)
have healed and the patient returns to the implant clinic
to be fitted with the external parts of the device (the KEY TERMS
speech processor,microphone,and transmitter). A clini-
cican tunes the speech processor and sets levels of stimu- Cochlea—The hearing part of the inner ear. This
lation for each electrode,from soft to loud. snail-shaped structure contains fluid and thou-
The patient is then trained in how to interpret the sands of microscopic hair cells tuned to various
sounds heard through the device. The length of the train- frequencies.
ing varies from days to years,depending on how well the Hair cells—Sensory receptors in the inner ear that
person can interpret the sounds heard through the device. transform sound vibrations into messages that trav-
el to the brain.
Risks Inner ear—The interior section of the ear, where
sound vibrations and information about balance
As with all operations, there are a few risks of
are translated into nerve impulses.
surgery. These include:
Middle ear—The small cavity between the
•dizziness
eardrum and the oval window that houses the
•facial paralysis(rarely) three tiny bones of hearing.
•infection at the incision site
Scientists aren’t sure about the long-term effects of
electrical stimulation on the nervous system. It is also
PERIODICALS
possible to damage the implant’s internal components Arana-Ward,Marie. “The Pros and Cons of Cochlear
by a blow to the head, which will render the device Implants.”Newsday,3 June 1997,B29.
unworkable. Platman,Cheryl. “Hearing aids:A Link to the World.”FDA
Consumer24 (1 Feb. 1990):18-23.
Signor,Roger. “Sound Advice:Cochlear Implants Improve
Normal results Learning for Deaf Children.”St. Louis Post-Dispatch,9
June 1995:01C.
Most profoundly, deaf patients who receive an
implant are able to discern medium and loud sounds, ORGANIZATIONS
including speech,at comfortable listening levels. Many Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf. 3417 Volta
use sound clues from the implant,together with speech Place NW,Washington,DC 20007. (202) 337-5220.
reading and other facial cues. Almost all adults improve <http://www.agbell.org>.
their communication skills when combining the implant American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 10801
with speech reading (lip reading),and some can under- Rockville Pike,Rockville,MD 20852. (800) 638-8255.
<http://www.asha.org>.
stand spoken words without speech reading. More than
Cochlear Implant Club International. 5335 Wisconsin Ave.
half of adults who lost hearing after they learned to speak
NW,Suite 440,Washington,D.C. 20015-2052. (202) 895-
can understand some speech without speech reading.
2781. <http://www.cici.org>.
About 30% can understand spoken sounds well enough
Hearing Loss Link. 2600 W. Peterson Ave.,Ste. 202,Chicago,
to use the phone.
IL 60659. (312) 743-1032,(312) 743-1007 (TDD).
Children who were born deaf or who lost their hear- National Association for the Deaf. 814 Thayer Ave.,Silver
Spring,MD 20910. (301) 587-1788,(301) 587-1789
ing before they could speak have the most difficulty in
(TDD). <http://www.nad.org>.
learning to use the implant. Research suggests,however,
that most of these children are able to learn spoken lan-
Carol A. Turkington
guage and understand speech using the implant.
Resources
BOOKS
Clark,Graeme M.,Robert S. C. Cowan,and Richard Dowell. Cognitive-behavioral therapy
Cochlear Implantation for Infants and Children.New
York:Singular Publishing Group,1997. Definition
Tye-Murray,Nancy. Cochlear Implants and Children:A Hand-
book for Parents.New York:Alexander Graham Bell Cognitive-behavioral therapy is an action-oriented
Association for the Deaf,1992. form of psychosocial therapy that assumes that maladap-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 839
Cognitive-behavioral
therapy
tive, or faulty, thinking patterns cause maladaptive torted thinking patterns, or cognitive distortions, and
behavior and “negative”emotions. (Maladaptive behav- change them (a process termed cognitive restructuring).
ior is behavior that is counter-productive or interferes
Behavioral therapy,or behavior modification,trains
with everyday living.) The treatment focuses on chang-
individuals to replace undesirable behaviors with healthi-
ing an individual’s thoughts (cognitive patterns) in order
er behavioral patterns. Unlike psychodynamic therapies,
to change his or her behavior and emotional state.
it does not focus on uncovering or understanding the
unconscious motivations that may be behind the maladap-
Purpose tive behavior. In other words,strictly behavioral therapists
don’t try to find out why their patients behave the way
Theoretically,cognitive-behavioral therapy can be
they do,they just teach them to change the behavior.
employed in any situation in which there is a pattern of
Cognitive-behavioral therapy integrates the cogni-
unwanted behavior accompanied by distress and impair-
tive restructuring approach of cognitive therapy with the
ment. It is a recommended treatment option for a number
behavioral modification techniques of behavioral thera-
of mental disorders, including affective (mood) disor-
py. The therapist works with the patient to identify both
ders,personality disorders,social phobia,obsessive-
the thoughts and the behaviors that are causing distress,
compulsive disorder(OCD),eating disorders,substance
and to change those thoughts in order to readjust the
abuse,anxietyor panic disorder,agoraphobia,post-
behavior. In some cases, the patient may have certain
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and attention-
fundamental core beliefs, called schemas, which are
deficit/hyperactivity disorder(ADHD). It is also fre-
flawed and require modification. For example,a patient
quently used as a tool to deal with chronic pain for
suffering from depression may be avoiding social contact
patients with illnesses such as rheumatoid arthritis,
with others, and suffering considerable emotional dis-
back problems, and cancer. Patients with sleep disor-
dersmay also find cognitive-behavioral therapy a useful
tress because of his isolation. When questioned why,the
patient reveals to his therapist that he is afraid of rejec-
treatment for insomnia.
tion,of what others may do or say to him. Upon further
exploration with his therapist,they discover that his real
Precautions fear is not rejection,but the belief that he is hopelessly
uninteresting and unlovable. His therapist then tests the
Cognitive-behavioral therapy may not be suitable for
reality of that assertion by having the patient name
some patients. Those who don’t have a specific behav-
friends and family who love him and enjoy his company.
ioral issue they wish to address and whose goals for ther-
By showing the patient that others value him,the thera-
apy are to gain insight into the past may be better served
pist both exposes the irrationality of the patient’s belief
by psychodynamic therapy. Patients must also be willing
and provides him with a new model of thought to change
to take a very active role in the treatment process.
his old behavior pattern. In this case,the person learns to
Cognitive-behavioral intervention may be inappro- think,“I am an interesting and lovable person; therefore I
priate for some severely psychotic patients and for cogni- should not have difficulty making new friends in social
tively impaired patients (for example, patients with situations.” If enough “irrational cognitions” are
organic brain disease or a traumatic brain injury), changed,this patient may experience considerable relief
depending on their level of functioning. from his depression.
A number of different techniques may be employed
Description in cognitive-behavioral therapy to help patients uncover
and examine their thoughts and change their behaviors.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy combines the individ-
They include:
ual goals of cognitive therapy and behavioral therapy.
•Behavioral homework assignments. Cognitive-behav-
Pioneered by psychologists Aaron Beck and Albert
ioral therapists frequently request that their patients
Ellis in the 1960s,cognitive therapy assumes that mal-
complete homework assignments between therapy ses-
adaptive behaviors and disturbed mood or emotions are
sions. These may consist of real-life “behavioral exper-
the result of inappropriate or irrational thinking patterns,
iments”where patients are encouraged to try out new
called automatic thoughts.Instead of reacting to the real-
responses to situations discussed in therapy sessions.
ity of a situation,an individual reacts to his or her own
distorted viewpoint of the situation. For example,a per- •Cognitive rehearsal. The patient imagines a difficult sit-
son may conclude that he is “worthless”simply because uation and the therapist guides him through the step-by-
he failed an exam or didn’t get a date. Cognitive thera- step process of facing and successfully dealing with it.
pists attempt to make their patients aware of these dis- The patient then works on practicing, or rehearsing,
840 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypareht
laroivaheb-evitingoC
these steps mentally. Ideally,when the situation arises
in real life, the patient will draw on the rehearsed KEY TERMS
behavior to address it.
•Journal. Patients are asked to keep a detailed diary Automatic thoughts—Thoughts that automatically
recounting their thoughts,feelings,and actions when come to mind when a particular situation occurs.
specific situations arise. The journal helps to make the Cognitive-behavioral therapy seeks to challenge
patient aware of his or her maladaptive thoughts and to automatic thoughts.
show their consequences on behavior. In later stages of Cognitive restructuring—The process of replacing
therapy,it may serve to demonstrate and reinforce posi- maladaptive thought patterns with constructive
tive behaviors. thoughts and beliefs.
•Modeling. The therapist and patient engage in role- Maladaptive—Unsuitable or counterproductive;
playing exercises in which the therapist acts out appro- for example, maladaptive behavior is behavior
priate behaviors or responses to situations. that is inappropriate to a given situation.
•Conditioning. The therapist uses reinforcement to Psychodynamic therapy—A therapeutic approach
encourage a particular behavior. For example,a child that assumes dysfunctional or unwanted behavior
with ADHD gets a gold star every time he stays focused is caused by unconscious, internal conflicts and
on tasks and accomplishes certain daily chores. The focuses on gaining insight into these motivations.
gold star reinforces and increases the desired behavior
Relaxation technique—A technique used to
by identifying it with something positive. Reinforce-
relieve stress. Exercise, biofeedback, hypnosis,
ment can also be used to extinguish unwanted behav-
and meditation are all effective relaxation tools.
iors by imposing negative consequences.
Relaxation techniques are used in cognitive-
•Systematic desensitization. Patients imagine a situation behavioral therapy to teach patients new ways of
they fear,while the therapist employs techniques to help coping with stressful situations.
the patient relax,helping the person cope with their fear
Schemas—Fundamental core beliefs or assump-
reaction and eventually eliminate the anxiety altogether.
tions that are part of the perceptual filter people
For example,a patient in treatment for agoraphobia,or
use to view the world. Cognitive-behavioral thera-
fear of open or public places,will relax and then picture
py seeks to change maladaptive schemas.
herself on the sidewalk outside of her house. In her next
session,she may relax herself and then imagine a visit to
a crowded shopping mall. The imagery of the anxiety-
producing situations gets progressively more intense
in the therapy process and discourages any overdepen-
until,eventually,the therapist and patient approach the
dence on the therapist that may occur in other therapeutic
anxiety-causing situation in real-life (a “graded expo-
relationships. Therapy is typically administered in an out-
sure”), perhaps by visiting a mall. Exposure may be
patient setting in either an individual or group session.
increased to the point of “flooding,”providing maximum
Therapists include psychologists (Ph.D.,Psy.D.,Ed.D. or
exposure to the real situation. By repeatedly pairing a
M.A. degree),clinical social workers (M.S.W.,D.S.W.,or
desired response (relaxation) with a fear-producing situa-
L.S.W. degree), counselors (M.A. or M.S. degree), or
tion (open,public spaces),the patient gradually becomes
psychiatrists (M.D. with specialization in psychiatry) and
desensitized to the old response of fear and learns to
should be trained in cognitive-behavioral techniques,
react with feelings of relaxation.
although some brief cognitive-behavioral interventions
•Validity testing. Patients are asked to test the validity of
may be suggested by a primary physician/caregiver.
the automatic thoughts and schemas they encounter.
Treatment is relatively short in comparison to some other
The therapist may ask the patient to defend or produce
forms of psychotherapy,usually lasting no longer than 16
evidence that a schema is true. If the patient is unable to
weeks. Many insurance plans provide reimbursement for
meet the challenge,the faulty nature of the schema is
cognitive-behavioral therapy services. Because coverage
exposed.
is dependent on the disorder or illness the therapy is treat-
Initial treatment sessions are typically spent explain- ing,patients should check with their individual plans.
ing the basic tenets of cognitive-behavioral therapy to the
patient and establishing a positive working relationship
Rational-emotive behavior therapy
between therapist and patient. Cognitive-behavioral thera-
py is a collaborative,action-oriented therapy effort. As Rational-emotive behavior therapy (REBT) is a pop-
such,it empowers the patient by giving him an active role ular variation of cognitive-behavioral therapy developed
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 841
Cognitive-behavioral
therapy
in 1955 by psychologist Albert Ellis. REBT is based on Preparation
the belief that a person’s past experiences shape their
Patients may seek therapy independently, or be
belief system and thinking patterns. People form illogi-
referred for treatment by a primary physician,psycholo-
cal,irrational thinking patterns that become the cause of
gist, or psychiatrist. Because the patient and therapist
both their negative emotions and of further irrational
work closely together to achieve specific therapeutic
ideas. REBT focuses on helping patients discover these
objectives,it is important that their working relationship
irrational beliefs that guide their behavior and replace
is comfortable and their goals are compatible. Prior to
them with rational beliefs and thoughts in order to relieve
beginning treatment, the patient and therapist should
their emotional distress.
meet for a consultation session,or mutual interview. The
There are 10 basic irrational assumptions that trigger consultation gives the therapist the opportunity to make
maladaptive emotions and behaviors: an initial assessment of the patient and recommend a
course of treatment and goals for therapy. It also gives
•It is a necessity for an adult to be loved and approved of
the patient an opportunity to find out important details
by almost everyone for virtually everything.
about the therapist’s approach to treatment,professional
•A person must be thoroughly competent,adequate,and credentials,and any other issues of interest.
successful in all respects.
In some managed-care clinical settings, an intake
•Certain people are bad, wicked, or villainous and interview or evaluation is required before a patient
should be punished for their sins. begins therapy. The intake interview is used to evaluate
the patient and assign him or her to a therapist. It may be
•It is catastrophic when things are not going the way one
conducted by a psychiatric nurse, counselor, or social
would like.
worker.
•Human unhappiness is externally caused. People have
little or no ability to control their sorrows or to rid
themselves of negative feelings. Normal results
•It is right to be terribly preoccupied with and upset Many patients who undergo cognitive-behavioral
about something that may be dangerous or fearsome. therapy successfully learn how to replace their mal-
adaptive thoughts and behaviors with positive ones that
•It is easier to avoid facing many of life’s difficulties and
facilitate individual growth and happiness. Cognitive-
responsibilities than it is to undertake more rewarding
behavioral therapy may be used in conjunction with
forms of self-discipline.
pharmaceutical and other treatment interventions, so
•The past is all-important. Because something once overall success rates are difficult to gauge. However,
strongly affected someone’s life,it should continue to success rates of 65% or more have been reported with
do so indefinitely. cognitive-behavioral therapy alone as a treatment for
panic attacks and agoraphobia. Relapse has been report-
•People and things should be different from the way they
ed in some patient populations,perhaps due to the brief
are. It is catastrophic if perfect solutions to the grim
nature of the therapy, but follow-up sessions can put
realities of life are not immediately found.
patients back on track.
•Maximal human happiness can be achieved by inertia
and inaction or by passively and without commitment.
Resources
BOOKS
Meichenbaum’s self-instructional approach
Greenberger,Dennis,and Christine Padesky. Mind over Mood:
Psychologist Donald Meichenbaum pioneered the A Cognitive Therapy Treatment Manual for Clients.New
self-instructional,or “self-talk,”approach to cognitive- York:Guilford Press,1995.
behavioral therapy in the 1970s. This approach focuses
PERIODICALS
on changing what people say to themselves,both inter-
Enright,Simon. “Cognitive Behaviour Therapy.”British Med-
nally and out loud. It is based on the belief that an indi-
ical Journal314,no. 7097 (June 1997):1811-16.
vidual’s actions follow directly from this self-talk. This
Goisman,R. M. “Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy Today.”Har-
type of therapy emphasizes teaching patients coping
vard Mental Health Letter13,no. 11 (May 1997):4-7.
skills that they can use in a variety of situations to help
themselves. The technique used to accomplish this is ORGANIZATIONS
self-instructional inner dialogue, a method of talking Albert Ellis Institute. 45 East 65th St.,New York,NY 10021.
through a problem or situation as it occurs. (800) 323-4738. <http://www.rebt.org>.
842 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypareht
laroivaheb-evitingoC
Beck Institute. GSB Building,City Line and Belmont Avenues,
Suite 700,Bala Cynwyd,PA 19004-1610. (610) 664- KEY TERMS
3020. <http://www.beckinstitute.org>.
The National Association of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapists.
Agglutinin—An antibody that causes red blood
P.O. Box 2195,Weirton,WV 26062. (800) 853-1135.
cells to stick or clump together.
<http://www.nacbt.org>.
Antibody—A protein molecule produced by the
Paula Anne Ford-Martin immune system that is specific to a disease agent,
such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae. The antibody
Colchicine see Gout drugs combines with the organism and disables it.
COLD see Chronic obstructive lung disease Autoantibody—An antibody produced by the
body in reaction to any of its own cells or cell
products.
Cold agglutinins—Antibodies that cause clumping
of red blood cells when the blood temperature falls
below normal body temperature (98.6°F/37°C).
Cold agglutinins test
Hemolytic anemia—Oxygen deficiency in the
Definition blood, caused by shortened survival of red blood
cells.
The cold agglutinins test is performed to detect the
presence of antibodies in blood that are sensitive to tem- Mycoplasma—A type of free-living microorganism
perature changes. Antibodies are proteins produced by that has no cell wall. Mycoplasmas cause some
the immune system in response to specific disease varieties of pneumonia and urinary tract infections
agents; autoantibodies are antibodies that the body pro- that stimulate the body to produce cold agglutinins.
duces against one of its own substances. Cold agglutinins
Titer—The concentration of a substance in a given
are autoantibodies that cause red blood cells to clump,
sample of blood or other tissue fluid.
but only when the blood is cooled below the normal body
temperature of 98.6°F (37°C). The clumping is most pro-
nounced at temperatures below 78°F (25.6°C).
cools the tube in ice water for 30–60 seconds,and looks
Purpose for clumping of red blood cells. If the cells clump after
chilling and unclump as they rewarm,a cold agglutinin
The cold agglutinins test is used to confirm the diag-
titer (concentration) greater than 1:64 is present. Bedside
nosis of certain diseases that stimulate the body to pro-
test results,however,should be confirmed by a laborato-
duce cold agglutinins. The disease most commonly diag-
ry. The laboratory test measures the clumping of red
nosed by this test is mycoplasmal pneumonia, but
blood cells in different dilutions of the patient’s blood
mononucleosis,mumps,measles,scarlet fever,some
serum at 39.2°F (4°C).
parasitic infections, cirrhosis of the liver, and some
types of hemolytic anemiacan also cause the formation
Normal results
of cold agglutinins. Hemolytic anemiasare conditions in
which the blood is low in oxygen because the red blood The results of the cold agglutinins test require a doc-
cells are breaking down at a faster rate than their normal tor’s interpretation. In general,however,a normal value
life expectancy of 120 days. In addition to these illness- is lower than 1:32.
es,some people have a benign condition called chronic
cold agglutinin disease,in which exposure to cold causes Abnormal results
temporary clumping of red blood cells and consequent
Any value higher than 1:32 suggests a diagnosis of
numbness in ears,fingers,and toes.
mycoplasmal pneumonia or one of the other viral infec-
tions or disease conditions indicated by this test.
Description
Since cold agglutinins cause red blood cells to Resources
clump only at temperatures lower than 98.6°F (37°C),
BOOKS
the test consists of chilling a sample of the patient’s
Dabrow,Michael B.,and Thomas G. Gabuzda. “Acquired
blood. There is a bedside version of the test in which the Hemolytic Anemia.”In Current Diagnosis.Vol. 9. Ed. Rex
doctor collects four or five drops of blood in a small tube, B. Conn,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 843
Cold
agglutinins
test
Feizi,Ten. “Cold Agglutinins.”In Encyclopedia of Immunolo- Viruses are different from bacteria. While bacteria
gy.Vol. 3. Ed. Ivan M. Roitt and Peter J. Delves. London: are independent and can reproduce on their own,viruses
Academic Press,1992. enter human cells and force them to make more virus. The
infected human cell is usually killed and releases thou-
Rebecca J. Frey sands of new viruses. The cell deathand resulting tissue
damage causes the actual cold sores. In addition,the her-
Cold sensitivity antibodies test see pes virus can infect a cell and instead of making the cell
Cryoglobulin test produce new viruses, it hides inside the cell and waits.
The herpes virus hides in the nervous system. This is
called “latency.”A latent virus can wait inside the nervous
system for days,months,or even years. At some future
time,the virus “awakens”and causes the cell to produce
thousands of new viruses that cause an active infection.
Cold sore
This process of latency and active infection is best
understood by considering the cold sore cycle. An active
Definition
infection is obvious because cold sores are present. The
A cold sore is a fluid-filled blister which usually first infection is called the “primary”infection. This active
appears at the edge of the lips. Cold sores are caused by a infection is then controlled by the body’s immune system
herpes simplex virus infection. and the sores heal. In between active infections,the virus
is latent. At some point in the future,latent viruses become
activated and once again cause sores. These are called
Description
“recurrent”infections. Although it is unknown what trig-
A cold sore is a fluid-filled, painful blister that is gers latent virus to activate, several conditions seem to
usually on or around the lips. Other names for a cold sore bring on infections. These include stress, illness, tired-
are feverblister,oral herpes,labial herpes,herpes labi- ness,exposure to sunlight,menstruation,fever,and diet.
alis,and herpes febrilis. Cold sores most often occur on
the lips which distinguishes them from the common
Causes and symptoms
canker sore, which is usually inside the mouth. Cold
sores do not usually occur inside the mouth except dur- While anyone can be infected by herpes virus,not
ing the initial episode. Canker soresusually form either everyone will show symptoms. The first symptoms of
on the tongue or inside the cheeks. herpes occur within two-20 days after contact with an
infected person. Symptoms of the primary infection are
Cold sores are caused by a herpes virus. There are
usually more severe than those of recurrent infections.
eight different kinds of human herpes viruses. Only two
The primary infection can cause symptoms like other
of these, herpes simplex types 1 and 2, can cause cold
viral infections including tiredness,headache,fever,and
sores. It is commonly believed that herpes simplex virus
swollen lymph nodes in the neck.
type 1 infects above the waist and herpes simplex virus
type 2 infects below the waist. This is not completely Typically,50-80% of persons with oral herpes expe-
true. Both herpes virus type 1 and type 2 can cause her- rience a prodrome (symptoms of oncoming disease) of
pes lesions on the lips or genitals, but recurrent cold pain,burning,itching,or tingling at the site where blis-
sores are almost always type 1. ters will form. This prodrome stage may last anywhere
from a few hours to one to two days. The herpes infec-
Oral herpes is very common. More than 60% of
tion prodrome occurs in both the primary infection and
Americans have had a cold sore, and almost 25% of
recurrent infections.
those infected experience recurrent outbreaks. Most of
these persons became infected before age 10. Anyone In 95% of the patients with cold sores,the blisters
can become infected by herpes virus and,once infected, occur at the outer edge of the lips which is called the
the virus remains latent for life. Herpes viruses are “vermilion border.”Less often,blisters form on the nose,
spread from person to person by direct skin-to-skin con- chin, or cheek. Following the prodrome, the disease
tact. The highest risk for spreading the virus is the time process is rapid. First, small red bumps appear that
period beginning with the appearance of blisters and end- quickly form fluid-filled blisters. The painful blisters
ing with scab formation. However,infected persons need may either burst and form a scab or dry up and form a
not have visible blisters to spread the infection to others scab. Within two days of the first red bumps,all the blis-
since the virus may be present in the saliva without obvi- ters have formed scabs. The skin heals completely and
ous oral lesions. without scarring within six to ten days.
844 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
eros
dloC
Some children have a very serious primary (first
episode) herpes infection called “gingivostomatitis.”This
causes fever,swollen lymph glands,and numerous blis-
ters inside the mouth and on the lips and tongue that may
form large,open sores. These painful sores may last up
to three weeks and can make eating and drinking diffi-
cult. Because of this,young children with gingivostom-
atitis are at risk for dehydration(excessive loss of water
from the body).
Most people experience fewer than two recurrent
outbreaks of cold sores each year. Some people never
experience outbreaks, while some have very frequent
outbreaks. In most people,the blisters form in the same
area each time and are triggered by the same factors
(such as stress,sun exposure,etc).
Diagnosis
Acyclovir (Zovirax) is the drug of choice for herpes
Because oral herpes is so common,it is diagnosed infection and can be given intravenously or taken by
primarily by symptoms. It can be diagnosed and treated mouth. It can be applied directly to sores as an ointment
by the family doctor,dermatologists (doctors who spe- but is not very useful in this form. A liquid form for chil-
cialize in skin diseases) and infectious disease special- dren is also available. Acyclovir is effective in treating
ists. Laboratory tests may be performed to look for the both the primary infection and recurrent outbreaks.
virus. Because healing sores do not shed much virus,a When taken by mouth to prevent an outbreak,acyclovir
sample from an open sore would be taken for viral cul- reduces the frequency of herpes outbreaks.
ture. A sterile cotton swab would be wiped over open
During an outbreak of cold sores,salty foods,citrus
sores and the sample used to infect human cells in cul-
foods (oranges etc.),and other foods that irritate the sores
ture. Cells that are killed by the herpes virus have a cer-
should be avoided. Wash the sores once or twice a day
tain appearance under microscopic examination. The
with warm,soapy water and pat gently to dry. Over-the-
results of this test are available within two to 10 days.
counter lip products that contain the chemical phenol
Oral herpes may resemble a bacterial infection called (such as Blistex Medicated Lip Ointment) and numbing
impetigo. This skin infection is most commonly seen in ointments (Anbesol) help to relieve cold sores. A bandage
children and causes herpes-like blisters around the mouth may be placed over the sores to protect them and prevent
and nose. Also,because oral herpes can occur inside the spreading the virus to other sites on the lips or face.
mouth,the blisters could be mistaken for common canker Acetaminophen(Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Motrin,Advil)
sores. Therefore, the doctor would need to determine may be taken if necessary to reduce pain and fever.
whether the blisters are oral herpes, canker sores, or
impetigo. The diagnosis and treatment of herpes infec-
tions should be covered by most insurance providers. Alternative treatment
Vitamin and mineral supplements and diet may have
Treatment an effect on the recurrence and duration of cold sores. In
general,cold sore sufferers should eat a healthy diet of
There is no cure for herpes virus infections. There
unprocessed foods such as vegetables,fruits,and whole
are antiviral drugs available that have some effect on
grains. Alcohol,caffeine,and sugar should be avoided.
lessening the symptoms and decreasing the length of her-
pes outbreaks. There is evidence that some may also pre- An imbalance in the amino acids lysine and arginine
vent future outbreaks. These antiviral drugs work by is thought to be one contributing factor in herpes virus out-
interfering with the replication of the viruses, and are breaks. A diet that is rich in the amino acid lysine may
most effective when taken as early in the infection help prevent recurrences of cold sores. Foods which con-
process as possible. For the best results,drug treatment tain high levels of lysine include most vegetables,
should begin during the prodrome stage before blisters legumes,fish,turkey,and chicken. In one study,patients
are visible. Depending on the length of the outbreak, taking lysine supplements had milder symptoms during an
drug treatment could continue for up to 10 days. outbreak,a shorter healing time,and had fewer outbreaks
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 845
Cold
sore
A close-up view of a patient’s mouth with gingivostomatitis
cold sores.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by per-
mission.)
Several practices can reduce the occurrence of cold
KEY TERMS sores and the spread of virus to other body locations or
people. These practices are:
Latent—A nonactive virus which is in a dormant •Avoidance of sun exposure to the face. Before getting
state within a cell. The herpes virus is latent in the prolonged exposure to the sun,apply sunscreen to the
nervous system. face and especially to the lips. Wearing a hat with a
Prodrome—The Symptoms that warn of the begin- large brim is also helpful.
ning of disease. The herpes prodrome consists of •Avoid touching cold sores. Squeezing, picking, or
pain, burning, tingling, or itching at a site before pinching blisters can allow the virus to spread to other
blisters are visible. parts of the lips or face and infect those sites.
Recurrence—The return of an active infection fol- •Wash hands frequently. Persons with oral herpes should
lowing a period of latency. wash their hands carefully before touching others. An
infected person can spread the virus to others even
when he or she has no obvious blisters.
•Avoid contact with others during active infection.
than patients who did not take lysine. Patients should take Infected persons should avoid kissing or sexual contact
1,000 mg of lysine three times a day during a cold sore with others until after the cold sores have healed.
outbreak and 500 mg daily on an ongoing basis to prevent
•Wear gloves when applying ointment to a child’s sore.
recurrences. Intake of the amino acid arginine should be
reduced. Foods rich in arginine that should be avoided are •Be especially careful with infants. Never kiss the eyes
chocolate,peanuts,almonds,and other nuts and seeds. or lips of a baby who is under six months old.
Vitamin C and bioflavonoids (a substance in fruits •Be watchful of infected children. Do not allow infected
that helps the body to absorb and use vitamin C) have children to share toys that may be put into the mouth.
been shown to reduce the duration of a cold sore outbreak Toys that have been mouthed should be disinfected
and reduce the number of sores. The vitamin B complex before other children play with them.
includes important vitaminsthat support the nervous sys-
•Maintain good general health. A healthy diet,plenty of
tem where viruses can hide out. B complex vitamins can
sleep,and exercisehelp to minimize the chance of get-
also help manage stress,an important contributing factor
ting a cold or the flu,which are known to bring on cold
to the outbreak of herpes viruses. Applying the oil in vita-
sores. Also,good general health keeps the immune sys-
min E capsules directly to cold sores may provide relief.
tem strong; this helps to keep the virus in check and
Zinc lozenges appear to affect the reproduction of viruses
prevents outbreaks.
and also enhance the immune system. Ointments contain-
ing lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) or licorice (Gly-
Resources
cyrrhiza glabra) and peppermint (Mentha piperita) have
been shown to help cold sores heal. BOOKS
Gorbach,Sherman,John Bartlett,and Neil Blacklow,eds.
Infectious Diseases.Philadelphia:W. B.Saunders Co.,
Prognosis
1998.
Oral herpes can be painful and embarrassing,but it
PERIODICALS
is not a serious infection. There is no cure for oral herpes,
Kott,Andrea. “The Common Cold Sore.”Parents,Nov. 1997,
but outbreaks usually occur less frequently after age 35.
101-105.
The spread of the herpes virus to the eyes is very serious.
Murray,Michael T. “Natural Help for Herpes and Cold Sores.”
The herpes virus can infect the cells in the cornea and Let’s Live,Apr. 1997,68+.
cause scarring that may impair vision.
OTHER
Mayo Clinic Online.5 Mar. 1998 <http://www.mayohealth.org>.
Prevention
The only way to prevent oral herpes is to avoid con- Belinda Rowland,PhD
tact with infected persons. This is not an easy solution
because many people aren’t aware that they are infected Cold spot myocardial imaging see Thallium
and can easily infect others. Currently there are no her-
heart scan
pes vaccines available, although herpes vaccines are
being tested. Colds see Common cold
846 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
eros
dloC
•is not hungry but cries for several hours between din-
Colic nertime and midnight
•demonstrates the clenched fists, rigidity, and other
Definition
physical traits associated with colic
Colic is persistent,unexplained crying in a healthy
The baby’s medical history and a parent’s descrip-
baby between two weeks and five months of age.
tion of eating,sleeping,and crying patterns are used to
confirm a diagnosis of colic. Physical examinationand
Description laboratory tests are used to rule out infection,intestinal
blockage,and other conditions that can cause abdominal
Colic,which is not a disease,affects 10–20% of all
pain and other colic-like symptoms.
infants. It is more common in boys than in girls and most
common in a family’s first child. Symptoms of colic usu-
ally appear when a baby is 14–21 days old, reach a Treatment
crescendo at the age of three months,and disappear with-
Medications do not cure colic. Doctors sometimes
in the next eight weeks. Episodes occur frequently but
recommend simethicone (Mylicon Drops) to relieve gas
intermittently and usually begin with prolonged periods
pain, but generally advise parents to take a practical
of crying in the late afternoon or evening. They can last
approach to the problem.
for just a few minutes or continue for several hours.
Some babies who have colic are simply fussy. Others cry Gently massaging the baby’s back can release a
so hard that their faces turn red,then pale. trapped gas bubble, and holding the baby in a sitting
position can help prevent air from being swallowed dur-
ing feedings. Bottle-fed babies can swallow air if nipple
Causes and symptoms
holes are either too large or too small.
No one knows what causes colic. The condition may
Nipple-hole size can be checked by filling a bottle
be the result of swallowing large amounts of air,which
with cold formula,turning it upside down,and counting
becomes trapped in the digestive tract and causes bloat-
the number of drops released when it is shaken or
ing and severe abdominal pain.
squeezed. A nipple hole that is the right size will release
Other possible causes of colic include: about one drop of formula every second.
•digestive tract immaturity Babies should not be fed every time they cry, but
feeding and burping a baby more often may alleviate
•food intolerances
symptoms of colic. A bottle-fed baby should be burped
•hunger or overfeeding after every ounce, and a baby who is breastfeeding
•lack of sleep should be burped every five minutes.
•loneliness When cow’s milk is the source of the symptoms,
bottle-fed babies should be switched to a soy milk
•overheated milk or formula
hydrolyzed protein formula. A woman whose baby is
•overstimulation resulting from noise,light,or activity breastfeeding should eliminate dairy products from her
•tension diet for seven days, then gradually reintroduce them
unless the baby’s symptoms reappear.
During a colicky episode,babies’bellies often look
swollen,feel hard,and make a rumbling sound. Crying Since intolerance to foods other than cow’s milk may
intensifies, tapers off, then gets louder. Many babies also lead to symptoms of colic,breastfeeding women may
grow rigid, clench their fists, curl their toes, and draw also relieve their babies’colic by eliminating from their diet:
their legs toward their body. A burp or a bowel move- •coffee
ment can end an attack. Most babies who have colic
•tea
don’t seem to be in pain between attacks.
•cocoa
Diagnosis •citrus
•peanuts
Pediatricians and family physicians suspect colic in
an infant who: •wheat
•has cried loudly for at least three hours a day at least •broccoli and other vegetables belonging to the cabbage
three times a week for three weeks or longer family
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 847
Colic
Rocking a baby in a quiet,darkened room can pre- ORGANIZATIONS
vent overstimulation, and a baby usually calms down American Academy of Family Physicians. 8880 Ward Parkway,
when cuddled in a warm,soft blanket. Kansas City,MO 64114. (816) 333-9700. <http://www.
aafp.org>.
Colicky babies cry less when they are soothed by the
American Academy of Pediatrics. 141 Northwest Point Boule-
motion of a wind-up swing,a car ride,or being carried in
vard,Elk Grove Village,IL 60007-1098. (847) 434-4000.
a parent’s arms. Pacifiers can soothe babies who are <http://www.aap.org>.
upset,but a pacifier should never be attached to a string.
OTHER
A doctor should be notified if a baby who has been “Colic.”University of Michigan Health System Page.7 May
diagnosed with colic: 1998 <http://www.mcare.org/healthtips>.
“Colic.”WebMD Health.7 May 1998 <http://my.webmd.com>.
•develops a rectal feverhigher than 101°F (38.3°C)
“Colic.”YourHealth.com Page.8 May 1998 <http://www.your
•cries for more than four hours health.com>.
•vomits
Maureen Haggerty
•has diarrheaor stools that are black or bloody
•loses weight Collapsed lung see Pneumothorax
•eats less than normal Colloidal bath see Therapeutic baths
Alternative treatment
Applying gentle pressure to the webbed area
between the thumb and index finger of either hand can
Colon cancer
calm a crying child. So can gently massaging the area
directly above the child’s navel and the corresponding Definition
spot on the spine. Applying warm compresses or holding
Cancerof the colon is the disease characterized by
your hand firmly over the child’s abdomen can relieve
the development of malignant cells in the lining or
cramping.
epithelium of the first and longest portion of the large
Teas made with chamomile (Matricaria recutita), intestine. Malignant cells have lost normal control mech-
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis), peppermint (Mentha anisms governing growth. These cells may invade sur-
piperita),or dill (Anethum graveolens) can lessen bowel rounding local tissue,or they may spread throughout the
inflammation and reduce gas. A homeopathic combina- body and invade other organ systems.
tion called “colic”may be effective,and constitutional
Synonyms for the colon include the large bowel or
homeopathic treatment can help strenthen the child’s
the large intestine. The rectum is the continuation of the
entire constitution.
large intestine into the pelvis that terminates in the anus.
Prognosis Description
Colic is distressing,but it is not dangerous. Symp- The colon is a tubular organ beginning in the right
toms almost always disappear before a child is six lower aspect of the abdomen. Anatomically,it ascends on
months old. the right side of the abdomen,traverses from right to left
in the upper abdomen,descends vertically down the left
side,takes an S-shaped curve in the lower left abdomen,
Prevention
and then flows into the rectum as it leaves the abdomen
Many doctors believe that colic cannot be prevented. for the pelvis. These portions of the colon are named sep-
Some alternative practitioners,however,feel that colic arately though they are part of the same organ:
can be prevented by an awareness of food intolerances
•cecum,the beginning of the colon
and their impact.
•ascending colon,the right vertical ascent of the colon
•transverse colon,the portion traversing from right to left
Resources
•descending colon,the left vertical descent of the colon
BOOKS
Taylor,Robert,ed. Family Medicine Principles and Practice. •sigmoid colon,the s-shaped segment of colon above the
New York:Springer-Verlag,1994. pelvis
848 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnac
noloC
These portions of the colon are recognized anatomi- women. (Lung cancer is the first affecting both men and
cally based on the arterial blood supply and venous and women,breast is the leader in women and prostate the
lymphatic drainage of these segments of the colon. leader in men.) Nearly 48,000 people died from colon
Lymph, a protein-rich fluid that bathes the cells of the cancer in the United States in 2000. In recent years the
body,is transported in small channels known as lymphat- incidence of this disease is decreasing very slightly,as
ics that run along side the veins of the colon. Lymph has the mortality rate. It is difficult to tell if the
nodes are small filters through which the lymph travels decrease in mortality reflects earlier diagnosis, less
on its way back to the blood stream. Cancer can spread deathrelated to the actual treatment of the disease,or a
elsewhere in the body by invading the lymph and vascu- combination of both factors.
lar systems. Therefore, these anatomic considerations
Cancer of the colon is thought to arise sporadically
become very important in the treatment of colon cancer.
in about 80% of those who develop the disease. Twenty
The small intestine is the continuation of the upper percent of cases are thought to have genetic predisposi-
gastrointestinal tract that is responsible for the transport tion that ranges from familial syndromes affecting 50%
of ingested nutrients into the body. The waste left after of the offspring of a mutation carrier, to a risk of 6%
the small intestine has completed absorption of nutrients when there is just a family history of colon cancer occur-
amounts to a few liters (about the same as quart) of mate- ring in a first degree relative. Development of colon can-
rial per day and is directly delivered to the colon (at the cer at an early age,or at multiple sites,or recurrent colon
cecum) for processing. Physiologically, the colon is cancer suggests a genetically transmitted form of the dis-
responsible for the preservation of fluid and electrolytes ease as opposed to the sporadic form.
as it propels the increasingly solid waste towards the rec-
tum and anus for excretion.
Causes and symptoms
When cells lining the colon become malignant,they
Causes of colon cancer are probably environmental
first grow locally and may invade partially or totally
in the sporadic cases (80%) and genetic in the heredity
through the wall of the bowel and even into adjacent
predisposed cases (20%). Since malignant cells have a
structures and organs. In the process,the tumor can pene-
changed genetic makeup, this means that in 80% of
trate and invade the lymphatics or the capillaries locally
cases, the environment spontaneously induces change,
and it gains access to the circulation. As the malignant
whereas in those born with a genetic predisposition,they
cells work their way to other areas of the body, they
are either destined to get the cancer or it will take less
again become locally invasive in the new area to which
environmental exposure to induce the cancer. Exposure
they have spread. These tumor deposits, originating in
to agents in the environment that may induce mutation is
the colon primary tumor,are then known as metastases.
the process of carcinogenesis and is caused by agents
If metastases are found in the regional lymph nodes from
known as carcinogens (cancer-causing agents). Specific
the primary, they are known as regional metastases or
carcinogens have been difficult to identify; however,
regional nodal metastases. If they are distant from the
dietary factors seem to be involved.
primary tumor,they are known as distant metastases. The
patient with distant metastases has systemic disease. Colon cancer is more common in industrialized
Thus the cancer originating in the colon begins locally nations and dietshigh in fat,red meat,total calories,and
and,given time,can become systemic in its extent. alcohol seem to predispose. Diets high in fiber are asso-
ciated with a decreased risk. The mechanism for protec-
By the time the primary is originally detected,it is tion by high-fiber diets may be related to less exposure of
usually larger than 0.4 in (1 cm) in size and has over a the colon lining to carcinogens from the environment,as
million cells. This amount of growth itself is estimated to the transit time through the bowel is faster with a high-
take about three to seven years. Each time the cells dou- fiber diet than it is with a low-fiber diet.
ble in number, the size of the tumor quadruples. Thus,
Age plays a definite role in the predisposition to
like most cancers,the part that is identified clinically is
colon cancer. Colon cancer is uncommon before age 40.
later in the progression than would be desired and
This incidence increases substantially after age 50 and
screening becomes a very important endeavor to aid in
doubles with each succeeding decade.
earlier detection of this disease.
There is also a slight increase risk for colon cancer
There are about 94,000 cases of colon cancer diag-
in the individual who smokes.
nosed per year in the United States. Together,colon and
rectal cancers account for 10% of cancers in men and Patients who suffer from inflammatory diseases of
11% of cancers in women. It is the second most com- the colon known as ulcerative colitisand Crohn’s colitis
mon site-specific cancer affecting both men and are also at increased risk.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 849
Colon
cancer
As for genetic predisposition, on chromosome 5, toms can be caused by other processes; these are not
there is a gene called the APC gene associated with the absolutely specific to colon cancer. The key is recogniz-
familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome. There are ing that the persistence of these types of symptoms with-
multiple different mutations that occur at this site, yet out ready explanation should prompt the individual to
they all cause a defect in tumor suppression that results seek medical evaluation.
in early and frequent development of colon cancer. This
Many of the symptoms are understood by remem-
genetic aberration is transmitted to 50% of offspring and
bering that the colon is a tubular conduit. If a tumor
each of those affected will develop colon cancer,usually
develops,as it reaches a certain size it will begin to cause
at an early age. There is another syndrome, hereditary
symptoms related to the obstruction of that conduit. In
non-polyposis colon cancer (also known as Lynch syn-
addition,the tumor commonly oozes blood that is lost in
drome),related to mutations in any of four genes respon-
the stool. (Often,this blood is not visible.) This phenom-
sible for DNA mismatch repair. In patients with colon
enon results in anemia and chronic fatigue. Weight loss is
cancer,the p53 gene is mutated 70% of the time. When
a late symptom,often implying substantial obstruction or
the p53 gene is mutated and ineffective,cells with dam-
the presence of systemic disease.
aged DNA escape repair or destruction. This allows for
the damaged cell to perpetuate itself, and continued
replication of the damaged DNA may lead to tumor
Diagnosis
development. Though these syndromes have a very high
incidence of colon cancer, family history without the Screening
syndrome is also a substantial risk factor. When consid-
Of all of the major cancers, only colorectal cancer
ering first-degree relatives,history of one with colon can-
can be prevented by screening. In all other cancers (breast
cer raises the baseline risk of 2% to 6%. (Most physi-
and prostate,for example),screening tests look for small,
cians think that this baseline is about 4%.) The presence
malignant lesions. Screening for colorectal cancers,how-
of a second raises the risk to 17%.
ever,is the search for pre-malignant,benign polyps. This
The development of polyps of the colon almost screening can be close to 100% effective in preventing
always precedes the development of colon cancer by five cancer development,not just in detecting small cancers.
or more years. Polyps are benign growths of the colon
Screening involves physical exam,simple laboratory
lining. They can be unrelated to cancer,precancerous,or
tests,and the visualization of the lining of the colon. The
malignant. Polyps, when identified, are removed for
ways to visualize the colon epithelium are with x rays (indi-
diagnosis. If the polyps are benign, the patient should
rect visualization),and endoscopy (direct visualization).
undergo careful surveillance for the development of
more polyps or the development of colon cancer. The physical examination involves the perfor-
mance of a digital rectal exam (DRE). The DRE includes
Colon cancer causes symptoms related to its local
manual examination of the rectum, anus, and the
presence in the large bowel or by its effect on other
prostate. During this examination,the physician exam-
organs if it has spread. These symptoms may occur alone
ines the anus and the surrounding skin for hemorrhoids,
or in combination:
abscesses,and other irregularities. After lubricating the
•a change in bowel habit gloved finger and anus, the examiner gently slides the
finger into the anus and follows the contours of the rec-
•blood in the stool
tum. The examiner notes the tone of the anus and feels
•bloating,persistent abdominal distention the walls and the edges for texture,tenderness and mass-
•constipation es as far as the examining finger can reach. At the time of
this exam,the physician checks the stool on the examin-
•a feeling of fullness even after having a bowel move-
ing glove with a chemical to see if any occult (invisible),
ment
blood is present. At home,after having a bowel move-
•narrowing of the stool—so-called ribbon stools ment, the patient is asked to swipe a sample of stool
obtained with a small stick on a card. After 3 such speci-
•persistent,chronic fatigue
mens are on the card,the card is then easily chemically
•abdominal discomfort tested for occult blood also. (The stool analysis men-
•unexplained weight loss tioned here is known as a fecal occult blood test, or
FOBT,and,while it can be helpful,it is not 100% accu-
•very rarely,nausea and vomiting
rate—only about 50% of cancers are FOBT-positive.)
Most of these symptoms are caused by the physical These exams are accomplished as an easy part of a rou-
presence of the tumor mass in the colon. Similar symp- tine yearly physical exam.
850 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnac
noloC
Proteins are sometimes produced by cancers, and
these may be elevated in the patient’s blood. When this
occurs,the protein produced is known as a tumor marker.
There is a tumor marker for some cancers of the colon; it
is known as carcinoembryonic antigen,or CEA. Unfortu-
nately,this protein may be made by other adenocarcino-
mas as well, or it may not be produced by a particular
colon cancer. Therefore,screening by chemical analysis
for CEA has not been helpful. CEA has been helpful
when used in a follow-up role for patients treated for
colon cancer if their tumor makes the protein.
Indirect visualization of the colon may be accom-
plished by placing barium through the rectum and filling the
colon with this compound. Barium produces a white con-
trast image of the lining of the colon on x ray and thus,the
contour of the lining of the colon may be seen. Detail can be
increased if the barium utilized is thinned and air also intro-
duced. These studies are known as the barium enema(BE)
and the double contrast barium enema (DCBE).
Direct visualization of the lining of the colon is
accomplished using a scope or endoscope. The physician related to colon cancer,the entire colon will be inspect-
introduces the instrument through the rectum and passes ed. The combination of a flexible sigmoidoscopy and
it proximally, visualizing the colon epithelium in the DCBE may be performed but the preferred evaluation of
process. Older,shorter scopes were rigid. Today,utiliz- the entire colon and rectum is that of complete
ing fiberoptic technology,the scopes are flexible and can colonoscopy. Colonoscopy allows direct visualization,
reach much farther. If the left colon only is visualized,it photography,and the opportunity to obtain a biopsy of
is called flexible sigmoidoscopy. When the entire colon any abnormality visualized. If,for technical reasons,the
is visualized,the procedure is known as colonoscopy. entire colon is not visualized endoscopically, a DCBE
should complement the colonoscopy.
Unlike the indirect visualizations of the colon (the
BE and the DCBE),the endoscopic screeenings allow the
The diagnosis of colon cancer is actually made by
physician to remove polyps and biopsy suspicious tissue.
the performance of a biopsy of any abnormal lesion in
(A biopsy is a removal of tissue for examination by a
the colon. When a tumor growth is identified,it could be
pthologist.) For this reason,many physicians prefer endo-
either a benign polyp (or lesion) or a cancer; the biopsy
scopic screening. All of the visualizations, the BE,
resolves the issue. The endoscopist may take many sam-
DCBE,and each type of endoscopy require pre-procedure
ples so as to exclude any sampling errors.
preparation (evacuation) of the colon.
If the patient presents with advanced disease,or has
The American Cancer Society has recommended the
advanced disease at the time of diagnosis,areas where
following screening protocol for those of normal risk
the tumor has spread (such as the liver) may be amenable
over 50 years of age:
to biopsy. Such biopsies are usually obtained using a spe-
•yearly DRE with occult blood in stool testing cial needle under local anesthesia.
•flexible sigmoidoscopy at age 50
Once a diagnosis of colon cancer has been estab-
•flexible sigmoidoscopy repeated every five years lished by biopsy, in addition to the physical exam,
studies will be performed to assess the extent of the
Many physicians,however,recommend full colono-
disease. Blood studies include a complete blood
scopy every five to seven years. Screening evaluations
count,liver function tests,and a CEA. Imaging stud-
should start sooner for patients who have predisposing
ies will include a chest x rayand a CAT scan (comput-
factors, such as family history, history of polyps, or a
ed tomography scan) of the abdomen. The chest x ray
familial syndrome.
will determine if there is spread to the lung, and the
CAT scan will evaluate potential spread to the liver as
Evaluation of patients with symptoms
well as any local invasive characteristics of the primary
For those whose symptoms prompt them to visit tumor. If the patient has any neurologic symptoms, a
their physician,and if their symptoms could possibly be CAT scan of the brain will be performed, and if the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 851
Colon
cancer
A colon with a cancerous growth.(Illustration by Argosy Inc.)
KEY TERMS
Adenocarcinoma—Type of cancer beginning in Malignant—Cells that have been altered such that
glandular epithelium. they have lost normal control mechanisms and are
capable of local invasion and spread to other areas
Adjuvant therapy—Treatment involving radiation,
of the body.
chemotherapy (drug treatment), or hormone thera-
py, or a combination of all three given after the pri- Metastasis—Site of invasive tumor growth that orig-
mary treatment for the possibility of residual micro- inated from a malignancy elsewhere in the body.
scopic disease.
Mutation—A change in the genetic makeup of a
Anastomosis—Surgical reconnection of the ends of cell that may occur spontaneously or be environ-
the bowel after removal of a portion of the bowel. mentally induced.
Anemia—The condition caused by too few circulat-
Occult blood—Presence of blood that cannot be
ing red blood cells, often manifested in part by
seen with the naked eye.
fatigue.
Polyps—Localized growths of the epithelium that
Carcinogens—Substances in the environment that
can be benign, precancerous, or harbor malig-
cause cancer, presumably by inducing mutations,
nancy.
with prolonged exposure.
Radical resection—Surgical resection that takes the
Electrolytes—Salts, such as sodium and chloride.
blood supply and lymph system supplying the
Epithelium—Cells composing the lining of an
organ along with the organ.
organ.
Resect—To remove surgically.
Lymphatics—Channels that are conduits for lymph.
Sacrum—Posterior bony wall of the pelvis.
Lymph nodes—Cellular filters through which lym-
phatics flow. Systemic—Referring to throughout the body.
patient is experiencing bone pain, a bone scan will •Stage IV:any of previous criteria associated with dis-
also be performed. tant metastasis.
With many cancers other than colon cancer,staging
Treatment plays an important pre-treatment role to best determine
treatment options. In colon cancer,almost all colon can-
Once the diagnosis has been confirmed by biopsy,
cers are treated with surgery first, regardless of stage.
the clinical stage of the cancer is assigned. Using the
Colon cancers through stage III,and even some stage IV
characteristics of the primary tumor,its depth of penetra-
colon cancers,are treated with surgery first before any
tion through the bowel,and the presence or absence of
other treatments are considered.
regional or distant metastases,the stage of the cancer is
derived. Often, the depth of penetration through the
bowel or the presence of regional lymph nodes can’t be Surgery
assigned before surgery.
Surgical removal of the involved anatomic segment
Colon cancer is assigned stages I through IV based of colon (colectomy) along with its blood supply and
on the following general criteria: regional lymph nodes is the primary therapy for colon
cancer. Usually,on the basis of the blood supply,the par-
•Stage I:the tumor is confined to the epithelium or has
tial colectomies are separated into right,left,transverse,
not penetrated through the first layer of muscle in the
or sigmoid. The removal of the blood supply at its origin
bowel wall.
along with the regional lymph nodes that accompany it
•Stage II:the tumor has penetrated through to the outer
assures an adequate margin of normal colon on either
wall of the colon or has gone through it,possibly invad-
side of the primary tumor. When the cancer lies in a posi-
ing other local tissue.
tion such that the blood supply and lymph drainage lies
•Stage III: any depth or size of tumor associated with between two of the major vessels,both vessels are taken
regional lymph node involvement. to assure complete radical resection or removal (extend-
852 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnac
noloC
ed radical right or left colectomy). If the primary tumor therapy is treatment with 5-fluorouracil,(5FU) combined
penetrates through the bowel wall,any tissue adjacent to with leucovorin for a period of six to 12 months. 5FU is
the tumor extension is also taken if feasible. an antimetabolite and leukovorin improves the response
rate. (A response is a temporary regression of the cancer
Surgery is used as primary therapy for stages I
in response to the chemotherapy.) Another agent, lev-
through III colon cancer unless there are signs that local
amisole,(which seems to stimulate the immune system),
invasion will not permit complete removal of the tumor,
may be substituted for leucovorin. These protocols
as may occur in advanced stage III tumors. However,this
reduce rate of recurrence by about 15% and reduce mor-
circumstance is very rare,and occurs in less than 2% of
tality by about 10%. The regimens do have some toxicity,
all colon cancer cases.
but usually are tolerated fairly well.
After the resection is completed, the ends of the
Similar chemotherapy may be administered for stage
remaining colon are reconstructed; the hook-up is called
IV disease or if a patient progresses and develops metas-
an anastomosis. Once healing has occurred,there may be a
tases. Results show response rates of about 20%. Unfortu-
slight increase in the frequency of bowel movements. This
nately,these patients eventually succumb to the disease,
effect usually lasts only for several weeks. Most patients
and this chemotherapy may not prolong survival or
go on to develop completely normal bowel function.
improve quality of life in Stage IV patients. Clinical trials
Occasionally, the anastomosis would be risky and
have now shown that the results can be improved with the
cannot be performed. (Most commonly,this occurs when
addition of another agent to this regimen. Irinotecan does
the bowel could not be adequately evacuated in an emer-
not seem to increase toxicity but it improved response rates
gency circumstance due to bowel obstruction.) When the
to 39%,added two to three months to disease-free survival,
anastomosis cannot be performed, a colostomy is per-
and prolonged overall survival by a little over two months.
formed instead. A colostomy is performed by bringing the
end of the colon through the abdominal wall and sewing it
Alternative treatment
to the skin. The patient will have to wear an appliance (a
bag) to manage the stool. The colostomy may be tempo- Alternative therapies have not been studied in a
rary and the patient may undergo a hook-up at a later,safer large-scale, scientific way. Large doses of vitamins,
date,or the colostomy may be permanent. In most cases, fiber,and green tea are among therapies tried. Avoiding
emergent colostomies are not reversed and are permanent. cigarettes and alcohol may be helpful. Before initiating
any alternative therapies, the patient is wise to consult
Radiation his/her physician to be sure that these therapies do not
complicate or interfere with the established therapy.
Radiation therapyis used as an adjunct to surgery
if there is concern about potential for local recurrence
post-operatively and the area of concern will tolerate the Prognosis
radiation. For instance,if the tumor invaded muscle of Prognosis is the long-term outlook or survival after
the abdominal wall but was not completely removed,this therapy. Overall,about 50% of patients treated for colon
area would be considered for radiation. Radiation has cancer survive the disease. As expected,the survival rates
significant dose limits when residual bowel is exposed to are dependent upon the stage of the cancer at the time of
it because the small and large intestine do not tolerate diagnosis, making early detection a very worthwhile
radiation well. endeavor.
Radiation is also used in the treatment of patients About 15% of patients present with stage I disease
who present with or progress to having metastatic dis- and 85–90% survive. Stage II represents 20–30% of
ease. It is particularly useful in shrinking metastatic cases and 65–75% survive. Thirt to forty percent com-
colon cancer to the brain. prise the stage III presentation of which 55% survive.
The remaining 20–25% present with stage IV disease
Chemotherapy and are very rarely cured.
Chemotherapyis useful for patients who have had
all identifiable tumor removed and are at risk for recur- Prevention
rence (adjuvant chemotherapy). Chemotherapy may also
There is not an absolute way of preventing colon
be used when the cancer is stage IV and is beyond the
cancer. Still,there are steps an individual can take to dra-
scope of regional therapy,but this use is rare.
matically lessen the risk or to identify the precursors of
Adjuvant therapy is considered in stage II disease colon cancer so that it does not manifest itself. The
with deep penetration or in stage III patients. Standard patient with a familial history can enter screening and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 853
Colon
cancer
surveillance programs earlier than the general popula- lons of water through it with the use of special equipment.
tion. High-fiber diets and vitamins,avoiding obesity,and It is similar to an enema but treats the whole colon,not just
staying active lessen the risk. Avoiding cigarettes and the lower bowel. This has the effect of flushing out impact-
alcohol may be helpful. By controlling these environ- ed fecal matter, toxins, mucous, and even parasites that
mental factors,an individual can lessen risk and to this often build up over the passage of time. It is a procedure
degree prevent the disease. that should only be undertaken by a qualified practitioner.
By undergoing appropriate screening when uncon-
trollable genetic risk factors have been identified, an
Purpose
individual may be rewarded by the identification of
benign polyps that can be treated as opposed to having Anyone suffering from gas, bloating, cramping
these growths degenerate into a malignancy. pains,acneand other skin complaints,arthritis,and a list
of bowel complaints such as diverticulitis and irritable
bowel etc.,may benefit from colonic irrigation. In partic-
Resources
ular, cancer patients are often advised to undertake a
BOOKS course of colonic irrigation sessions as an essential part
Abelhoff,Martin,James O. Armitage,Allen S. Lichter,and John of their treatment. When a biological cancer therapy
E. Niederhuber. Clinical Oncology Library. Philadelphia:
begins to enable the body to breakdown a cancerous
Churchill Livingstone,1999.
mass,it is essential that speedy and effective elimination
Jorde,Lynn B.,John C. Carey,Michael J. Bamshad,and Ray-
of the resulting toxins is achieved.
mond L. White. Medical Genetics,Second Edition. St.
Louis:Mosby,1999. Colon and bowel cancer is one of the leading causes
Kirkwood,John M.,Michael T. Lotze,and Joyce M. Yasko. of deathin the United States,and alternative practitioners
Current Cancer Therapeutics,Third Edition. Philadel- insist that it can be prevented by efficient hygiene proce-
phia:Churchill Livingstone,1998 dures. Providing that care is taken to replace the natural
organisms that flourish in the bowel,many health benefits
PERIODICALS
Greenlee,Robert T.,Mary Beth Hill-Harmon,Taylor Murray, can be expected from colonic irrigation. In general,alter-
and Michael Thun. “Cancer Statistics 2001.”CA:A Can- native practitioners maintain that an ill-functioning bowel
cer Journal for Clinicians,51,no. 1 (Jan/Feb 2001). is the source of all disease,and therefore keeping it clean
Saltz,Leonard,et al. “Irinotecan plus Fluorouracil and Leucov- will be an effective protection against this.
orin for Metastatic Colorectal Cancer.”The New England
Removing large amounts of toxic matter relieves the
Journal of MedicineVolune 343,No. 13 (September 28,
patient and can lead to the alleviation of symptoms such
2000).
as arthritis,chronic fatigue syndrome,candidiasis,and
ORGANIZATIONS a host of other illnesses. Properly executed,colonic irriga-
American Cancer Society. (800) ACS-2345. <http://www.
tion can help restore normal peristaltic action to a slug-
cancer.org>.
gish bowel,thus reducing the need for more hydrotherapy
Cancer Information Service of the NCI. (1-800-4-CANCER).
treatments over time. In addition,removing the layer of
<http://wwwicic.nci.nih.gov>.
fecal matter which coats the intestines in many individu-
Colon Cancer Alliance. <http://www.ccalliance.org>.
als allows improved assimilation of the nutrients from
National Cancer Institute Cancer Trials. <http://cancertrials.
nci.nih.gov/system>. <http://www.cancertrials.com>. foods and can alleviate symptoms of vitamin and other
nutrient deficiencies. Many alternative health practition-
Richard A. McCartney,MD ers consider some form of hydrotherapy for the bowel to
be essential in the treatment of degenerative diseases.
Colon therapy see Colonic irrigation
Description
Origins
Cleansing the colon with the use of hydrotherapy is
Colonic irrigation not a new concept. Forms of colonic irrigation have been
used successfully for decades to relieve chronic toxicity
Definition and even acute cases of toxemia.
Colonic irrigation is also known as hydrotherapyof Over time, many people develop a thick layer of
the colon,high colonic,entero-lavage,or simply colonic. It fecal matter that coats their colon. It hardens and
is the process of cleansing the colon by passing several gal- becomes impacted,reducing the efficiency of the bowel,
854 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitagirri
cinoloC
and in some cases,completely obstructing normal elimi-
nation of waste matter from the body. It is quite common KEY TERMS
for people to only have one bowel movement per day,
and some as few as one or two per week. Dysbiosis—The condition that results when the
Alternative practitioners advise that we probably natural flora of the gut are thrown out of balance,
should have one bowel movement for every meal that we such as when antibiotics are taken.
eat. If not,then we are not eliminating wastes complete- Peristalsis—The natural wave-like action of a
ly,and if input exceeds output,then we will surely suffer healthy bowel that transports matter from one end
the consequences at some point. of the bowel to the other.
Incomplete elimination of body wastes may result in Probiotics—Supplements of beneficial microor-
the following,depending on where the deposits end up: ganisms that normally colonize the gut.
•sluggish system Toxemia—Poisoning of the blood.
•joint painand arthritis
•irritable bowel syndrome
•diverticulitis
have been in the colon for years. Some therapists com-
•Crohn’s disease ment that it looks like aging rubber.
•leaky gut syndrome During the treatment,the therapist will gently massage
the patient’s abdomen to help dislodge impacted fecal mat-
•heart problem
ter. In addition to massage, sometimes acupressure,
•migraine
reflexology,or lymphatic drainage techniques may be used
•allergies to loosen deposits and stimulate the bowel. It is important
that the right amount of water is used, as too much will
•bad breath
cause discomfort and too little will be ineffective. If cor-
•acne and other skin problems such as psoriasis
rectly done,colonic irrigation is not painful at all and some
•asthma patients claim to sleep through their treatment.
•early senility and Alzheimer’s disease Sanitation is vital to this process. The tubes and
speculums used are generally disposable,but other parts
•chronic fatiguesyndrome
of the machine,such as the viewing tube,must be steril-
•cancer,particularly of the bowel
ized after each patient.
•multiple sclerosis
Normally,a series of treatments will be required to
During colonic irrigation, a small speculum is achieve desired results regarding the elimination of
passed into the patient’s bowel through the rectum. This impacted,decaying matter,and restoration of bowel reg-
is attached to a tube, which leads to a machine that ularity. Initially,only gas and recent fecal matter may be
pumps temperature-controlled water into the colon at a expelled. The residue attached to the colon wall is usual-
controlled rate (to be controlled by either the practitioner ly the result of years of neglect,and therapists say that
or the patient). The temperature of the water should ide- one cannot expect complete relief in only one session.
ally be kept as close to body temperature as possible.
Impacted fecal matter can cause an imbalance of the
The patient will temporarily be filled with water up natural organisms that normally populate the bowel,caus-
to the level of the entire colon. Patients say they can feel ing what is known as dysbiosis. Under ideal conditions,
the water up under their ribs but that the process, the bowel is populated by a variety of naturally occurring
although sometimes uncomfortable,is not painful. The organisms. It seems that the enzymes occurring in fresh
amount of water will vary but will generally be in the fruit and vegetables encourage these beneficial organ-
region of between two and six liters (or quarts) at any isms. One of the results of eating processed denatured
one time. This triggers peristaltic action and the patient foods is that this natural balance is upset,and food may
will begin to expel the water along with fecal matter back begin to rot in the bowel instead of being processed.
through the tube and into the machine.
Decomposing matter can cause a toxic condition and
The fecal matter is flushed out through a viewing may lead to many health problems,as constipationcaus-
tube,so that what is eliminated may be monitored. Quite es backed up pollution of the body cells. The process of
often, unsuspected parasites are expelled, along with repair and elimination of wastes enters a downward spi-
very old fecal material, very dark in color, which may ral which at best will cause fatigue,lack of energy and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 855
Colonic
irrigation
premature aging,and,at worst,can cause degenerative ORGANIZATIONS
diseases, among them allergies, and even cancer and California Colon Hygienist Society. 333 Miller Ave.,Suite 1,
Alzheimer’s disease. Mill Valley,CA 94941. (415) 383-7224.
Intestinal Health Institute. 4427 East Fifth St.,Tucson,AZ
The cost of colonic irrigation treatments varies,but
85711. (520) 325-9686. info@sheilas.com. <http://www.
is generally between $35–70 per session, which may
sheilas.com>.
last from 45 minutes to one hour. The cost of the
machine itself ranges from $4,000–12,000,but again,it
Patricia Skinner
should be noted that only qualified therapists should
conduct sessions.
Preparations
Most practitioners prefer that distilled or purified Colonoscopy
water is used for colonic irrigation,but others use steril-
Definition
ized tap water.
Colonoscopy is a medical procedure where a long,
Precautions flexible, tubular instrument called the colonoscope is
used to view the entire inner lining of the colon (large
It may be advisable to use a probiotic pessary after
intestine) and the rectum.
colonic irrigation,to ensure replacement of desirable nat-
ural flora. There are certain conditions that either partly
or completely preclude the use of colonic irrigation,such Purpose
as an active attack of Crohn’s disease,bleeding ulcers,
A colonoscopy is generally recommended when the
and hyperacidosis. If in doubt, a qualified practitioner
patient complains of rectal bleeding or has a change in
should be consulted. Anyone suffering from these condi-
bowel habits and other unexplained abdominal symp-
tions should always notify the practitioner when receiv-
toms. The test is frequently used to test for colorectal
ing colonic irrigation treatments.
cancer, especially when polyps or tumor-like growths
have been detected using the barium enemaand other
Side effects diagnostic tests. Polyps can be removed through the
colonoscope and samples of tissue (biopsies) can be
Some allopathic practitioners claim that colonic irri-
taken to test for the presence of cancerous cells.
gation flushes out essential electrolytes and friendly bac-
teria from the bowel and that it can be dangerous. Practi- The test also enables the physician to check for
tioners counter that this can easily be remedied with the bowel diseases such as ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s
use of probiotics,and that in any case,these possible dis- disease. It is a necessary tool in monitoring patients who
advantages are easily offset by the benefits of having have a past history of polyps or colon cancer.
large amounts of putrefying matter,harmful organisms,
and parasites removed from the system.
Description
The procedure can be done either in the doctor’s
Research and general acceptance
office or in a special procedure room of a local hospital.
Although many alternative health care practitioners An intravenous (IV) line will be started in a vein in the
swear by colonic irrigation, there is a large allopathic arm. The patient is generally given a sedative and a pain-
lobby that claims that there are no benefits to be had,and killer through the IV line.
that there are dangers involved. However,there are many
During the colonoscopy,the patient will be asked to
decades of records and research from the alternative
lie on his/her left side with his/her knees drawn up
health care community that indicate that this therapy may
towards the abdomen. The doctor begins the procedure
have a valuable place in the treatment of degenerative
by inserting a lubricated,gloved finger into the anus to
diseases and toxic conditions.
check for any abnormal masses or blockage. A thin,well-
lubricated colonoscope will then be inserted into the anus
Resources and it will be gently advanced through the colon. The lin-
BOOKS ing of the intestine will be examined through the scope.
Bonk,Melinda,ed. Alternative Medicine Yellow Pages. Occasionally air may be pumped through the colono-
Tiburon,CA:Future Medicine Publishing,Inc.,1994. scope to help clear the path or open the colon. If there are
856 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypocsonoloC
excessive secretions, stool, or blood that obstruct the ration may be tiring and can produce diarrhea and
viewing, they will be suctioned out through the scope. cramping. During the colonoscopy,the sedative and the
The doctor may press on the abdomen or ask the patient painmedications will keep the patient very drowsy and
to change his/her position in order to advance the scope relaxed. Most patients complain of minor discomfort and
through the colon. pressure from the colonoscope moving inside. However,
the procedure is not painful.
The entire length of the large intestine can be exam-
ined in this manner. If suspicious growths are observed,
tiny biopsy forceps or brushes can be inserted through Preparation
the colon and tissue samples can be obtained. Small
The doctor should be notified if the patient has aller-
polyps can also be removed through the colonoscope.
gies to any medications or anesthetics; any bleeding
After the procedure, the colonoscope is slowly with-
problems; or if the woman is pregnant. The doctor should
drawn and the instilled air is allowed to escape. The anal
also be informed of all the medications that the person is
area is then cleansed with tissues.
currently on and if he or she has had a barium x-ray
The procedure may take anywhere from 30 minutes examination recently. If the patient has had heart valves
to two hours depending on how easy it is to advance the replaced,the doctor should be informed so that appropri-
scope through the colon. Colonoscopy can be a long and ate antibiotics can be administered to prevent any
uncomfortable procedure,and the bowel cleaning prepa- chance of infection. The risks of the procedure will be
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 857
Colonoscopy
Colon
Light
Polyp
Light
Polyp
Viewing monitor
Rectum
Colonoscope
Colonoscopy is a procedure where a long and flexible tubular instrument called a colonoscope is inserted into the patient’s
anus in order to view the lining of the colon and rectum.It is performed to test for colorectal cancer and other bowel dis-
eases,and enables the physician to collect tissue samples for laboratory analysis.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
until the return from the enema is clear of stool particles.
KEY TERMS On the morning of the examination, the patient is
instructed not to eat or drink anything. The preparatory
Barium enema—An x-ray test of the bowel after procedures are extremely important since,if the colon is
giving the patient an enema of a white chalky sub- not thoroughly clean,the exam cannot be done.
stance that outlines the colon and the rectum.
Biopsy—Removal of a tissue sample for examina- Aftercare
tion under the microscope to check for cancer
After the procedure,the patient is kept under obser-
cells.
vation until the effects of the medications wear off. The
Colonoscope—A thin, flexible, hollow, lighted patient will have to be driven home by somebody and can
tube that in inserted through the rectum into the generally resume a normal diet and usual activities
colon to enable the doctor to view the entire lin- unless otherwise instructed. The patient will be advised
ing of the colon. to drink lots of fluids to replace those lost by laxatives
and fasting.
Crohn’s disease—A chronic inflammatory disease
where the immune system starts attacking one’s For a few hours after the procedure,the patient may
own body. The disease generally starts in the gas- feel groggy. There may be some abdominal cramping
trointestinal tract. and considerable amount of gas may be passed. If a biop-
sy was performed or a polyp was removed,there may be
Diverticulosis—A pouchlike section that bulges
small amounts of blood in the stool for a few days. If the
through the large intestine’s muscular walls but is
patient experiences severe abdominal pain or has persis-
not inflamed. It may cause bleeding, stomach dis-
tent and heavy bleeding,it should be brought to the doc-
tress and excess gas.
tor’s attention immediately.
Pathologist—A doctor who specializes in the
diagnosis of disease by studying cells and tissues
under a microscope. Risks
Polyps—An abnormal growth that develops on the The procedure is virtually free of any complications
inside of a hollow organ such as the colon. and risks. Very rarely (two in 1000 cases) there may be a
perforation (a hole) in the intestinal wall. Heavy bleeding
Ulcerative colitis—A chronic condition where
due to the removal of the polyp or from the biopsy site
recurrent ulcers are found in the colon. It is mani-
occurs very infrequently (one in 1000 cases). Infections
fested clinically by abdominal cramping, and rec-
due to a colonoscopy are also extremely rare. Patients
tal bleeding.
with artificial or abnormal heart valves are usually given
antibiotics before and after the procedure to prevent an
infection.
explained to the patient before performing the procedure
and the patient will be asked to sign a consent form. Normal results
The results are said to be normal if the lining of the
It is important that the colon be thoroughly cleaned
colon is a pale reddish pink and there are no abnormal
before performing the examination. Hence, before the
looking masses that are found in the lining of the colon.
examination, considerable preparation is necessary to
clear the colon of all stool. The patient will be asked to
refrain from eating any solid food for 24–48 hours before Abnormal results
the test. Only clear liquids such as juices,broth,and Jello
Abnormal results would imply that polyps or other
are recommended. The patient is advised to drink plenty
suspicious-looking masses were detected in the lining of
of water to avoid dehydration. The evening before the
the intestine. Polyps can be removed during the proce-
test,the patient will have to take a strong laxative that the
dure and tissue samples can be biopsied. If cancerous
doctor has prescribed. Several 1 qt enemasof warm tap
cells are detected in the tissue samples,then a diagnosis
water may have to be taken on the morning of the exam.
of colon cancer is made. The pathologist analyzes the
Commercial enemas (e.g.,Fleet) may be used.
tumor cells further to estimate the aggressiveness of the
The patient will be given specific instructions on tumor and the extent of spread of the disease. This is
how to use the enema and how many such enemas are crucial before deciding on the mode of treatment for the
necessary. Generally, the procedure has to be repeated disease. Abnormal findings could also be due to inflam-
858 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypocsonoloC
matory bowel diseases such as ulcerative colitis or Blue color blindness (protanopia) is an inability to
Crohn’s disease. A condition called diverticulosis, distinguish both blue and yellow,which are seen as white
where many small fingerlike pouches protrude from the or gray. Protanopia is quite rare and has equal prevalence
colon wall,may also contribute to an abnormal result in in males and females. It is common for young children to
the colonoscopy. have blue/green confusion that becomes less pronounced
in adulthood. Blue color deficiency often appears in peo-
Resources ple who have physical disorders such as liver disease or
diabetes mellitus.
BOOKS
Berkow,Robert,et al.,eds. Merck Manual of Diagnosis and A total inability to distinguish colors (achromatop-
Therapy.16th ed. Merck Research Laboratories,1992. sia) is exceedingly rare. These affected individuals view
The Patient’s Guide to Medical Tests.Ed. Barry L. Zaret,et al. the world in shades of gray. They frequently have poor
Boston:Houghton Mifflin,1997. visual acuity and are extremely sensitive to light (photo-
Sobel,David S.,and T. Ferguson. The People’s Book of Med- phobia),which causes them to squint in ordinary light.
ical Tests.Summit Books,1985.
Researchers studying red/green color blindness in
ORGANIZATIONS
the United Kingdom reported an average prevalence of
American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Rd.,NE,Atlanta,GA
only 4.7% in one group. Only 1% of Eskimo males are
30329-4251. (800) 227-2345. <http://www.cancer.org>.
color blind. Approximately 2.9% of boys from Saudi
Cancer Research Institute. 681 Fifth Ave.,New York,N.Y.
Arabia and 3.7% from India were found to have deficient
10022. (800) 992-2623. <http://www.cancerresearch.org>.
color vision. Red/green color blindness may slightly
National Cancer Institute. Building 31,Room 10A31,31 Cen-
ter Drive,MSC 2580,Bethesda,MD 20892-2580. (800) increase an affected person’s chances of contracting lep-
422-6237. <http://www.nci.nih.gov>. rosy. Pre-term infants exhibit an increased prevalence of
United Ostomy Association,Inc. (UOA). 19772 MacArthur blue color blindness. Achromatopsia has a prevalence of
Blvd.,Suite 200,Irvine,CA 92612-2405. (800) 826-0826. about 1 in 33,000 in the United States and affects males
<http://www.uoa.org>. and females equally.
Lata Cherath,PhD
Causes and symptoms
Red/green and blue color blindness appear to be
located on at least two different gene locations. The
majority of affected individuals are males. Females are
Color blindness
carriers,but are not normally affected. This indicates that
Definition the X chromosome is one of the locations for color blind-
ness. Male offspring of females who carry the altered
Color blindness is an abnormal condition character-
gene have a 50-50 chance of being color-blind. The rare
ized by the inability to clearly distinguish different colors
female that has red/green color blindness,or rarer still,
of the spectrum. The difficulties can be mild to severe. It
blue color blindness,indicates there is an involvement of
is a misleading term because people with color blindness
another gene. As of 2001,the location of this gene has
are not blind. Rather,they tend to see colors in a limited
not been identified.
range of hues; a rare few may not see colors at all.
Achromatopsia,the complete inability to distinguish
color, is an autosomal recessive disease of the retina.
Description
This means that both parents have one copy of the altered
Normal color vision requires the use of specialized gene but do not have the disease. Each of their children
receptor cells called cones,which are located in the reti- has a 25% chance of not having the gene,a 50% chance
na of the eye. There are three types of cones,termed red, of having one altered gene (and,like the parents,being
blue,and green,which enable people to see a wide spec- unaffected), and a 25% risk of having both the altered
trum of colors. An abnormality,or deficiency,of any of gene and the condition. In 1997,the achromatopsia gene
the types of cones will result in abnormal color vision. was located on chromosome 2.
There are three basic variants of color blindness. The inability to correctly identify colors is the only
Red/green color blindness (deuteranopia) is the most sign of color blindness. It is important to note that people
common deficiency, affecting 8% of Caucasian males with red/green or blue varieties of color blindness use
and 0.5% of Caucasian females. The prevalence varies other cues such as color saturation and object shape or
with culture. location to distinguish colors. They can often distinguish
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 859
Color
blindness
number that is clearly located somewhere in the center of
KEY TERMS a circle of variously colored dots. A color-blind person is
not able to distinguish the number.
Achromatopsia—The inability to distinguish any The Ishihara test is comprised of eight plates that are
colors. similar to the American Optical Pseudoisochromatic test
Cones—Receptor cells that allow the perception plates. The individual being tested looks for numbers
of colors. among the various colored dots on each test plate. Some
plates distinguish between red/green and blue color
Deuteranopia—The inability or difficulty in distin-
blindness. Individuals with normal color vision perceive
guishing red/green colors.
one number. Those with red/green color deficiency see a
Photophobia—An extreme sensitivity to light. different number. Those with blue color vision see yet a
Protanopia—The inability of difficulty in distin- different number.
guishing blue and yellow colors.
A third analytical tool is the Titmus II Vision Tester
Retina—The light-sensitive layer of tissue in the Color Perception test. The subject looks into a stereo-
back of the eye that receives and transmits visual scopic machine. The test stimulus most often used in
signals to the brain through the optic nerve. professional offices contains six different designs or
numbers on a black background,framed in a yellow bor-
Rod—Photoreceptor that is highly sensitive to low
der. Titmus II can test one eye at a time. However, its
levels of light and transmits images in shades of gray.
value is limited because it can only identify red/green
deficiencies and is not highly accurate.
red or green if they can visually compare the colors. Treatment
However,most have difficulty accurately identifying col-
There is no treatment or cure for color blindness.
ors without any other references. Most people with any
Most color vision deficient persons compensate well for
impairment in color vision learn colors, as do other
their abnormality and usually rely on color cues and
young children. These individuals often reach adoles-
details that are not consciously evident to persons with
cence before their visual deficiency is identified.
typical color vision.
Color blindness is sometimes acquired. Chronic ill-
Inherited color blindness cannot be prevented. In the
nesses that can lead to color blindness include Alzheimer’s
case of some types of acquired color deficiency, if the
disease,diabetes mellitus,glaucoma,leukemia,liver dis-
cause of the problem is removed, the condition may
ease,chronic alcoholism,macular degeneration,multi-
improve with time. But for most people with acquired
ple sclerosis,Parkinson’s disease,sickle cell anemia,and
color blindness,the damage is usually permanent.
retinitis pigmentosa. Accidents or strokes that damage the
retina or affect particular areas of the brain eye can lead to
color blindness. Some medications such as antibiotics,
Prognosis
barbiturates,anti-tuberculosis drugs,high blood pressure
medications,and several medications used to treat nervous Color blindness that is inherited is present in both
disorders and psychological problems may cause color eyes and remains constant over an individual’s entire life.
blindness. Industrial or environmental chemicals such as Some cases of acquired color vision loss are not severe,
carbon monoxide,carbon disulfide,fertilizers,styrene,and may appear in only one eye, and last for only a short
some containing lead can cause loss of color vision. Occa- time. Other cases tend to be progressive,becoming worse
sionally,changes can occur in the affected person’s capaci- with time.
ty to see colors after age 60.
Resources
Diagnosis BOOKS
Rosenthal,Odeda,and Robert H. Phillips. Coping with Color
There are several tests available to identify problems
Blindness.Garden City Park,NY:Avery Publishing
associated with color vision. The most commonly used is
Group,1997.
the American Optical/Hardy,Rand,and Ritter Pseudo-
Sacks,Oliver. The Island of the Colorblind.New York,Knopf,
isochromatic test. It is composed of several discs filled 1997.
with colored dots of different sizes and colors. A person Wiggs,Janey L. “Color Vision.”In:Ophthalmology,ed. Myron
with normal color vision looking at a test item sees a Yanoff and Jay S. Duker. St. Louis,Mosby,2000.
860 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ssendnilb
roloC
PERIODICALS Colostomy refers to a surgical procedure where a portion
Arbour NC; Zlotogora J; Knowlton RG; Merin S; Rosenmann of the large intestine is brought through the abdominal
A; Kanis AB; Rokhlina T; Stone EM; Sheffield VC. wall to carry stool out of the body.
“Homozygosity Mapping of Achromatopsia to Chromo-
some 2 Using DNA Pooling.”Human Molecular Genetics
1997 May; 6(5):689-694. Purpose
Dobson V; Quinn GE; Abramov I; Hardy RJ; Tung B;
A colostomy is created as a means to treat various
Siatkowski RM; Phelps DL. “Color Vision Measured with
disorders of the large intestine,including cancer,obstruc-
Pseudoisochromatic Plates at Five-and-a-Half Years in
tion,inflammatory bowel disease,ruptured diverticulum,
Eyes of Children from the CRYO-ROP Study.”Investiga-
tions in Ophthalmology and Visual Science (Nov 1996); ischemia (compromised blood supply), or traumatic
37(12):2467-2474. injury. Temporary colostomies are created to divert stool
Holroyd E; Hall DM. “A Re-Appraisal of Screening for Colour from injured or diseased portions of the large intestine,
Vision Impairments.”Child Care Health Developments allowing rest and healing. Permanent colostomies are per-
(Sep 1997); 23(5):391-398. formed when the distal bowel (bowel at the farthest dis-
Osuobeni EP. “Prevalence of Congenital Red-Green Color tance) must be removed or is blocked and inoperable.
Vision Defects in Arab Boys from Riyadh,Saudi Arabia.”
Although colorectal cancer is the most common indica-
Ophthalmic Epidemiology (Dec 1996); 3(3):167-170.
tion for a permanent colostomy,only about 10–15% of
ORGANIZATIONS patients with this diagnosis require a colostomy.
Achromatopsia Network. C/O Frances Futterman,PO Box
214,Berkeley,CA 94701-0214. <http://www.achromat.
Description
org/how_to_join.html>.
American Academy of Ophthalmology. PO Box 7424,San
Surgery will result in one of three types of colos-
Francisco,CA 94120-7424. (415) 561-8500. <http://
tomies:
www.eyenet.org>.
International Colour Vision Society:Forschungsstelle fuer •End colostomy. The functioning end of the intestine
Experimentelle Ophthalmologie. Roentgenweg 11,Tue- (the section of bowel that remains connected to the
bingen,D-72076. Germany <http://orlab.optom.unsw. upper gastrointestinal tract) is brought out onto the sur-
edu.au/ICVS>. face of the abdomen,forming the stoma by cuffing the
National Society to Prevent Blindness. 500 East Remington intestine back on itself and suturing the end to the skin.
Rd.,Schaumburg,IL 60173. (708) 843-2020 or (800)
A stoma is an artificial opening created to the surface of
331-2020. <http://www.preventblindness.org>.
the body. The surface of the stoma is actually the lining
OTHER of the intestine,usually appearing moist and pink. The
“Breaking the Code of Color.”Seeing,Hearing and Smelling distal portion of bowel (now connected only to the rec-
the World. <http://www.hhmi.org/senses/b/b130.htm>. tum) may be removed,or sutured closed and left in the
“Color Blindness.”Geocities. <http://www.geocities.com/ abdomen. An end colostomy is usually a permanent
Heartland/8833/coloreye.html>.
ostomy,resulting from trauma,cancer or another patho-
“Medical Encyclopedia:Colorblind.”MEDLINEplus. <http://
logical condition.
medlineplus.adam.com/ency/article/001002sym.htm>.
University of Manchester. <http://www.umist.ac.uk/UMIST_ •Double–barrel colostomy. This colsotomy involves the
OVS/welcome.html>. creation of two separate stomas on the abdominal wall.
University of Nevada–Reno. <http://www.delamare.unr.edu/cb/>. The proximal (nearest) stoma is the functional end that
is connected to the upper gastrointestinal tract and will
L. Fleming Fallon,Jr.,MD,MPH
drain stool. The distal stoma,connected to the rectum
and also called a mucous fistula,drains small amounts
Colorectal cancer see Colon cancer; Rectal
of mucus material. This is most often a temporary
cancer
colostomy performed to rest an area of bowel,and to be
later closed.
•Loop colostomy. This colostomy is created by bringing
a loop of bowel through an incision in the abdominal
wall. The loop is held in place outside the abdomen by
Colostomy
a plastic rod slipped beneath it. An incision is made in
the bowel to allow the passage of stool through the loop
Definition
colostomy. The supporting rod is removed approxi-
Ostomy is a surgical procedure used to create an mately 7-10 days after surgery, when healing has
opening for urine and feces to be released from the body. occurred that will prevent the loop of bowel from
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 861
Colostomy
retracting into the abdomen. A loop colostomy is most of stool. Oral anti-infectives (neomycin,erythromycin,
often performed for creation of a temporary stoma to or kanamycin sulfate) may be ordered to decrease bacte-
divert stool away from an area of intestine that has been ria in the intestine and help prevent post-operative infec-
blocked or ruptured. tion. A nasogastric tube is inserted from the nose to the
stomach on the day of surgery or during surgery to
remove gastric secretions and prevent nausea and vom-
Preparation iting. A urinary catheter (a thin plastic tube) may also be
inserted to keep the bladder empty during surgery,giving
As with any surgical procedure,the patient will be
more space in the surgical field and decreasing chances
required to sign a consent form after the procedure is
of accidental injury.
explained thoroughly. Blood and urine studies, along
with various x rays and an electrocardiograph (EKG),
may be ordered as the doctor deems necessary. If possi- Aftercare
ble, the patient should visit an enterostomal therapist,
Post-operative care for the patient with a new colos-
who will mark an appropriate place on the abdomen for
tomy, as with those who have had any major surgery,
the stoma,and offer pre-operative education on ostomy
involves monitoring of blood pressure,pulse,respirations,
management.
and temperature. Breathing tends to be shallow because
In order to empty and cleanse the bowel,the patient of the effect of anesthesia and the patient’s reluctance to
may be placed on a low residue diet for several days prior breathe deeply and experience painthat is caused by the
to surgery. A liquid diet may be ordered for at least the abdominal incision. The patient is instructed how to sup-
day before surgery, with nothing by mouth after mid- port the operative site during deep breathing and cough-
night. A series of enemas and/or oral preparations ing,and given pain medication as necessary. Fluid intake
(GoLytely or Colyte) may be ordered to empty the bowel and output is measured,and the operative site is observed
862 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ymotsoloC
Colon
Closed incision
Catheter
Glass rod
Colostomy bag
A colostomy is a surgical procedure in which a portion of the large intestine,or colon,is brought through the abdominal wall
to carry feces out of the body.There are three types of colostomies:end colostomy,double-barrel colostomy,and loop
colostomy.The loop colostomy is featured in the illustration above.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
for color and amount of wound drainage. The nasogastric
tube will remain in place, attached to low intermittent KEY TERMS
suction until bowel activity resumes. For the first 24–48
hours after surgery, the colostomy will drain bloody Diverticulum—Pouches that project off the wall of
mucus. Fluids and electrolytes are infused intravenously the intestine, visible as opaque on an x ray after the
until the patient’s diet is can gradually be resumed,begin- patient has swallowed a contrast (dye) substance.
ning with liquids. Usually within 72 hours,passage of gas
Embolism—Blockage of a blood vessel by any
and stool through the stoma begins. Initially the stool is
small piece of material traveling in the blood. The
liquid,gradually thickening as the patient begins to take
emboli may be caused by germs, air, blood clots,
solid foods. The patient is usually out of bed in 8–24
or fat.
hours after surgery and discharged in 2–4 days.
Enema—Insertion of a tube into the rectum to
A colostomy pouch will generally have been placed
infuse fluid into the bowel and encourage a bowel
on the patient’s abdomen, around the stoma, during
movement. Ordinary enemas contain tap water,
surgery. During the hospital stay,the patient and his or
mixtures of soap and water, glycerine and water,
her caregivers will be educated on how to care for the
or other materials.
colostomy. Determination of appropriate pouching sup-
plies and a schedule of how often to change the pouch Intestine—Commonly called the bowels, divided
should be established. Regular assessment and meticu- into the small and large intestine. They extend
lous care of the skin surrounding the stoma is important from the stomach to the anus. The small intestine
to maintain an adequate surface on which to apply the is about 20 ft (6 m) long. The large intestine is
pouch. Some patients with colostomies are able to rou- about 5 ft (1.5 m) long.
tinely irrigate the stoma,resulting in regulation of bowel Ischemia—A compromise in blood supply deliv-
function; rather than needing to wear a pouch, these ered to body tissues that causes tissue damage or
patients may need only a dressing or cap over their death.
stoma. Often, an enterostomal therapist will visit the
Ostomy—A surgically created opening in the
patient at home after discharge to help with the patient’s
abdomen for elimination of waste products (urine
resumption of normal daily activities.
or stool).
Risks
Potential complications of colostomy surgery include:
•excessive bleeding •headache,muscle aches,dizziness,or fever
•surgical wound infection •increased abdominal pain or swelling, constipation,
•thrombophlebitis (inflammation and blood clot to veins nausea or vomiting or black,tarry stools
in the legs) Stomal complications to be monitored include:
•pneumonia
•Death (necrosis) of stomal tissue. Caused by inade-
•pulmonary embolism(blood clot or air bubble in the quate blood supply,this complication is usually visible
lungs’blood supply) 12–24 hours after the operation and may require addi-
tional surgery.
Normal results
•Retraction (stoma is flush with the abdomen surface or
Complete healing is expected without complica- has moved below it). Caused by insufficient stomal
tions. The period of time required for recovery from the length, this complication may be managed by use of
surgery may vary depending of the patient’s overall special pouching supplies. Elective revision of the
health prior to surgery. The colostomy patient without stoma is also an option.
other medical complications should be able to resume all
•Prolapse (stoma increases length above the surface of
daily activities once recovered from the surgery.
the abdomen). Most often results from an overly large
opening in the abdominal wall or inadequate fixation of
Abnormal results
the bowel to the abdominal wall. Surgical correction is
The doctor should be made aware of any of the fol- required when blood supply is compromised.
lowing problems after surgery:
•Stenosis (narrowing at the opening of the stoma). Often
•increased pain,swelling,redness,drainage,or bleeding associated with infection around the stoma or scarring.
in the surgical area Mild stenosis can be removed under local anesthesia.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 863
Colostomy
Severe stenosis may require surgery for reshaping the
stoma.
•Parastomal hernia(bowel causing bulge in the abdomi-
nal wall next to the stoma). This is due to placement of
the stoma where the abdominal wall is weak or creation
of an overly large opening in the abdominal wall. The
use of an ostomy support belt and special pouching
supplies may be adequate. If severe,the defect in the
abdominal wall should be repaired and the stoma
moved to another location.
Resources
BOOKS
Doughty,Dorothy. Urinary and Fecal Incontinence.St. Louis: A colposcopy makes it possible for a physician to view this
Mosby-Year Book,Inc.,1991. healthy cervix without surgery.(Photograph by Dr.P.Marazzi,
Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Hampton,Beverly,and Ruth Bryant. Ostomies and Continent
Diversions.St. Louis:Mosby-Year Book,Inc.,1992.
Monahan,Frances. Medical-Surgical Nursing.Philadelphia:W.
sue. If a PAP testshows abnormal cell growth,further
B. Saunders Co.,1998.
testing,such as colposcopy,often is required. A PAP test
Suddarth,Doris. The Lippincott Manual of Nursing.Philadel-
is a screening test that involves scraping cells from the
phia:J. B. Lippincott,1991.
outside of the cervix. If abnormal cells are found, the
ORGANIZATIONS physician will attempt to find the area that produced the
United Ostomy Association,Inc. (UOA). 19772 MacArthur
abnormal cells and remove it for further study (biopsy).
Blvd.,Suite 200,Irvine,CA 92612-2405. (800) 826-0826.
Only then can a diagnosis be made.
<http://www.uoa.org>.
Wound Ostomy and Continence Nurses Society. 1550 South Colposcopy may also be performed if the cervix
Coast Highway,Suite #201 Laguna Beach,CA 92651. looks abnormal during a routine examination. It may also
be suggested for women with genital warts and for
OTHER
diethylstilbestrol (DES) daughters (women whose moth-
“Colostomy.”ThriveOnline.20 Apr. 1998 <http://thriveonline.
ers took DES when pregnant with them).
oxygen.com>.
Kathleen D. Wright,RN Precautions
Women who are pregnant,or who suspect that they
are pregnant,must tell their doctor before the procedure
begins. Pregnant women can, and should, have a col-
poscopy if they have an abnormal PAP test. However,spe-
Colposcopy
cial precautions must be taken during biopsy of the cervix.
Definition
Description
Colposcopy is a procedure that allows a physician to
take a closer look at a woman’s cervix and vagina using a A colposcopy is performed in a physician’s office
special instrument called a colposcope. It is used to and is similar to a regular gynecologic exam. An instru-
check for precancerous or abnormal areas. The colpo- ment called a speculum is used to hold the vagina open,
scope can magnify the area between 10 and 40 times; and the gynecologist looks at the cervix and vagina
some devices also can take photographs. through the colposcope instead simply by eye, as in a
routine examination.
Purpose The colposcope is placed outside the patient’s body
and never touches the skin. The cervix and vagina are
The colposcope helps to identify abnormal areas of
swabbed with dilute acetic acid (vinegar). The solution
the cervix or vagina so that small pieces of tissue (biop-
highlights abnormal areas by turning them white (instead
sies) can be taken for further analysis.
of a normal pink color). Abnormal areas can also be
Colposcopy is used to identify or rule out the exis- identified by looking for a characteristic pattern made by
tence of any precancerous conditions in the cervical tis- abnormal blood vessels.
864 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypocsoploC
KEY TERMS
Biopsy—Removal of sample of abnormal tissue for
more extensive examination under a microscope.
Cervix—The neck of the uterus.
Cryosurgery—Freezing and destroying abnormal
cells.
DES—The abbreviation for diethylstilbestrol, a
synthetic form of estrogen that was widely pre-
scribed to women from 1940 to 1970 to prevent
complications. It was linked to several serious
birth defects and disorders of the reproductive sys-
tem in daughters of women who took DES. In
1971, the FDA suggested it not be used during
pregnancy and banned its use in 1979 as a growth
promoter in livestock.
If any abnormal areas are seen,the doctor will take a Diathermy—Also called electrocautery, this is a
biopsy of the tissue, a common procedure that takes procedure that heats and destroys abnormal cells.
about 15 minutes. Several samples might be taken, It is gradually being replaced by cryosurgery,
depending on the size of the abnormal area. A biopsy lasers, or LEEP.
may cause temporary discomfort and cramping,which Human papilloma virus—A virus that causes com-
usually go away within a few minutes. If the abnormal mon warts of the hands and feet, as well as lesions
area appears to extend inside the cervical canal,a scrap- in the genital and vaginal area. More than 50
ing of the canal may be done. The biopsy results are usu- types of HPV have been identified, some of which
ally available within a week. are linked to cancerous and precancerous condi-
If the tissue sample indicates abnormal growth (dys- tions, including cancer of the cervix.
plasia) or precancer,and if the entire abnormal area can Loop electrosurgical excision (LEEP)—A proce-
be seen, the doctor can destroy the tissue using one of dure that can help diagnose and treat cervical
several procedures, including ones that use high heat abnormalities, using a thin wire loop that emits a
(diathermy), extreme cold (cryosurgery), or lasers. low-voltage high-frequency radio wave that can
Another procedure,called a loop electrosurgical excision excise tissue. It is considered better than either
(LEEP),uses low-voltage high-frequency radio waves to lasers or electrocautery because it can both diag-
excise tissue. If any of the abnormal tissue is within the nose and treat precancerous cells or early stage
cervical canal,a cone biopsy (removal of a conical sec- cancer at the same time.
tion of the cervix for inspection) will be needed.
PAP test—The common term for the Papanicolaou
test, a simple smear method of examining stained
Preparation
cells to detect cancer of the cervix.
Colposcopy is a painless procedure that does not
Speculum—A retractor used to separate the walls
require any anesthetic medication. If a biopsy is done,
of the vagina to make visual examination easier.
there may be mild cramps or a sharp pinching when the
tissue is removed. To lessen this pain,your doctor may
recommend 800 mg of ibuprofen (Motrin) taken the
night before and the morning of the procedure (no later doctor applies Monsel’s solution to the area to stop the
than 30 minutes before the appointment). Patients who bleeding. When this mixes with blood it creates a black
are pregnant or allergic to aspirinor ibuprofen can take fluid that looks like coffee grounds for a couple of days
two tablets of acetaminophen(Tylenol) instead. after the procedure. It is also normal to have some spot-
ting after a colposcopy.
Aftercare
Patients should not use tampons or put anything else
If a biopsy was done, there may be a dark vaginal in the vagina for at least a week after the procedure,or
discharge afterwards. After the sample is removed,the until the doctor says it’s safe. In addition,women should
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 865
Colposcopy
This colposcopic view of the cervix reveals CIN 2 dysplasia,
or abnormal growth of cells.This is the second stage in the
development of cervical cancer.(Custom Medical Stock
Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
not have sex or douche for at least a week after the proce- (actions which,when performed on a healthy individual,
dure because of the risk of infection. result in reactions) are unable to affect any response,and
normal reflexes may be lost.
Risks
Occasionally,patients may have bleeding or infec- Description
tion after biopsy. Bleeding is usually controlled with a
Coma lies on a spectrum with other alterations in con-
topical medication.
sciousness. The level of consciousness required by, for
A patient should call her doctor right away if she example,someone reading this passage lies at one extreme
notices any of the following symptoms: end of the spectrum,while complete brain deathlies at the
•heavy vaginal bleeding (more than one sanitary pad an other end of the spectrum. In between are such states as
hour) obtundation,drowsiness,and stupor. All of these are con-
ditions which,unlike coma,still allow the individual to
•fever,chills,or an unpleasant vaginal odor
respond to stimuli,although such a response may be brief
•lower abdominal pain. and require stimulus of greater than normal intensity.
In order to understand the loss of function suffered
Normal results
by a comatose individual,it is necessary to first under-
If visual inspection shows that the surface of the stand the important characteristics of the conscious state.
cervix is smooth and pink,this is considered normal. If Consciousness is defined by two fundamental elements:
abnormal areas are found and biopsied and the results awareness and arousal.
show no indication of cancer,a precancerous condition,
Awareness allows one to receive and process all the
or other disease,this also is considered normal.
information communicated by the five senses,and thus
relate to oneself and to the outside world. Awareness has
Abnormal results both psychological and physiological components. The
Abnormal conditions that can be detected using col- psychological component is governed by an individual’s
poscopy and biopsy include precancerous tissue changes mind and mental processes. The physiological compo-
(cervical dysplasia),cancer,and cervical warts(human nent refers to the functioning of an individual’s brain,
papilloma virus). and therefore that brain’s physical and chemical condi-
tion. Awareness is regulated by cortical areas within the
cerebral hemispheres, the outermost layer of the brain
Resources
that separates humans from other animals by allowing
BOOKS for greater intellectual functioning.
Carlson,Karen J.,Stephanie A. Eisenstat,and Terra Ziporyn.
Arousal is regulated solely by physiological func-
The Harvard Guide to Women’s Health.Cambridge,MA:
Harvard University Press,1996. tioning and consists of more primitive responsiveness to
Ryan,Kenneth J.,Ross S. Berkowitz,and Robert L. Barbieri. the world,as demonstrated by predictable reflex (invol-
Kistner’s Gynecology.6th ed. St. Louis:Mosby,1995. untary) responses to stimuli. Arousal is maintained by
the reticular activating system (RAS). This is not an
ORGANIZATIONS
anatomical area of the brain, but rather a network of
American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology. 20
structures (including the brainstem,the medulla,and the
W. Washington St.,Ste. #1,Hagerstown,MD 21740.
thalamus) and nerve pathways,which function together
(800) 787-7227. <http://www.asccp.org>.
to produce and maintain arousal.
Carol A. Turkington
Causes and symptoms
Coma,then,is the result of something that interferes
with the functioning of the cerebral cortex and/or the
Coma
functioning of the structures which make up the RAS. In
fact,a huge and varied number of conditions can result in
Definition
coma. A good way of categorizing these conditions is to
Coma,from the Greek word “koma,”meaning deep consider the anatomic and the metabolic causes of coma.
sleep,is a state of extreme unresponsiveness,in which an Anatomic causes of coma are those conditions that dis-
individual exhibits no voluntary movement or behavior. rupt the normal physical architecture of the brain struc-
Furthermore, in a deep coma, even painful stimuli tures responsible for consciousness,either at the level of
866 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
amoC
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 867
Coma
Cortex
Thalamus
Mid-brain reticular
formation
A side-view of the brain, showing movement
of the reticular activating substance (RAS)
essential to consciousness
Diffuse and bilateral damage to the cerebral cortex Mass lesions in this region resulting in
(relative preservation of brain-stem reflexes) compression of the brain-stem and damage
to the reticular activating substance (RAS)
Brain-stem
compression
Possible causes
• Damage due to lack of oxygen or restricted blood flow, perhaps
resulting from cardiac arrest, an anaesthetic accident, or shock
• Damage incurred from metabolic processes associated with
kidney or liver failure, or with hypoglycemia
• Trauma damage
• Damage due to a bout with meningitis, encephalomyelitis, or a
severe systemic infection
Structural lesions within this region also resulting Lesions within the brain-stem directly suppressing
in compression of the brain-stem and damage to the reticular activating substance (RAS)
the reticular activating substance (RAS)
Local brain-stem
pressure
Asymmetrical brain- Symmetrical
stem signs depression of
brain-stem reflexes
Possible causes • Cerebellar tumors, abscesses, or hemorrhages Possible causes • Drug overdosage
The four brain conditions that result in coma.(Illustration by Hans & Cassady.)
mate outcome of the coma. The Glasgow Coma Scale
KEY TERMS assigns a different number of points for exam results in
three different categories: opening the eyes, verbal
Anatomic—Related to the physical structure of an response (using words or voice to respond),and motor
organ or organism. response (moving a part of the body). Fifteen is the
largest possible number of total points, indicating the
Metabolic—Refers to the chemical processes of an
highest level of functioning. The highest level of func-
organ or organism.
tioning would be demonstrated by an individual who
Neuron—The cells within the body which make spontaneously opens his/her eyes, gives appropriate
up the nervous system, specifically those along answers to questions about his/her situation, and can
which information travels. carry out a command (such as “move your leg”or “nod
Physiological—Pertaining to the functioning of an your head”). Three is the least possible number of total
organ, as governed by the interactions between its points and would be given to a patient for whom not even
physical and chemical conditions. a painful stimulus is sufficient to provoke a response. In
the middle are those patients who may be able to
Psychological—Pertaining to the mind, its mental
respond,but who require an intense or painful stimulus,
processes, and its emotional makeup.
and whose response may demonstrate some degree of
Stimulus/stimuli—Action or actions performed brain malfunctioning (such as a person whose only
on an individual which predictably provoke(s) a response to painin a limb is to bend that limb in toward
reaction. the body). When performed as part of the admission
examination, a Glasgow score of three to five points
often suggests that the patient has likely suffered fatal
brain damage,while eight or more points indicates that
the cerebal cortex or the brainstem, while metabolic the patient’s chances for recovery are good. Expansion of
causes of coma consist of those conditions that change the pupils and respiratory pattern are also important.
the chemical environment of the brain,thereby adversely Metabolic causes of coma are diagnosed from blood
affecting function. work and urinalysisto evaluate blood chemistry,drug
screen, and blood cell abnormalities that may indicate
There are many metabolic causes of coma,including:
infection. Anatomic causes of coma are diagnosed from
•A decrease in the delivery to the brain of substances computed tomography scans (CT) or magnetic reso-
necessary for appropriate brain functioning, such as nance imaging (MRI) scans.
oxygen,glucose (sugar),and sodium.
•The presence of certain substances that disrupt the Treatment
functioning of neurons. Drugs or alcohol in toxic quan-
Coma is a medical emergency, and attention must
tities can result in neuronal dysfunction, as can sub-
first be directed to maintaining the patient’s respiration
stances normally found in the body, but that, due to
and circulation,using intubation aand ventilation,admin-
some diseased state,accumulate at toxic levels. Accu-
istration of intravenous fluids or blood as needed, and
mulated substances that might cause coma include
other supportive care. If head trama has not been exclud-
ammonia due to liver disease, ketones due to uncon-
ed,the neck should be stablized in the event of fracture. It
trolled diabetes,or carbon dioxide due to a severe asth-
is obviously extremely important for a physician to deter-
maattack.
mine quickly the cause of a coma, so that potentially
•The changes in chemical levels in the brain due to the
reversible conditions are treated immediately. For exam-
electrical derangements caused by seizures.
ple,an infection may be treated with antibiotics; a brain
tumor may be removed; and brain swelling from an
injury can be reduced with certain medications. Various
Diagnosis
metabolic disorders can be addressed by supplying the
As in any neurologic condition,history and exami- individual with the correct amount of oxygen,glucose,or
nation form the cornerstone of diagnosis when the sodium; by treating the underlying disease in liver dis-
patient is in a coma; however,history must be obtained ease, asthma, or diabetes; and by halting seizures with
from family,friends,or EMS. The Glasgow Coma Scale medication. Because of their low incidence of side effects
is a system of examining a comatose patient. It is helpful and potential for prompt reversal of coma in certain con-
for evaluating the depth of the coma, tracking the ditions,glucose,the B-vitamin thiamine,and Narcan (to
patient’s progress, and predicting (somewhat) the ulti- counteract any narcotic-type drugs) are routinely given.
868 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
amoC
Prognosis ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Neurology. 1080 Montreal Ave.,St.
Some conditions that cause coma can be completely
Paul,MN 55116. (612) 695-1940. <http://www.aan.com>.
reversed, restoring the individual to his or her original Coma Recovery Association,Inc. 570 Elmont Rd.,Suite 104,
level of functioning. However,if areas of the brain have Elmont,NY 11003. (516) 355-0951.
been sufficiently damaged due to the severity or duration
of the condition which led to the coma, the individual Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
may recover from the coma with permanent disabilities,
or may even never regain consciousness. Take,for exam- Combat neurosis see Post-traumatic stress
ple,the situation of someone whose coma was caused by disorder
brain injury in a car accident. Such an injury can result in
one of three outcomes. In the event of a less severe brain
injury,with minimal swelling,an individual may indeed
recover consciousness and regain all of his or her original
abilities. In the event of a more severe brain injury,with
swelling that resulted in further pressure on areas of the Common cold
brain,an individual may regain consciousness,but may
Definition
have some degree of impairment. The impairment may
be physical (such as paralysis of a leg) or may even The common cold is a viral infection of the upper
result in a change in the individual’s intellectual func- respiratory system,including the nose,throat,sinuses,
tioning and/or personality. The most severe types of eustachian tubes, trachea, larynx, and bronchial tubes.
brain injury,short of death,result in states in which the Although over 200 different viruses can cause a cold,
individual loses all ability to function and remains deeply 30–50% are caused by a group known as rhinoviruses.
unresponsive. An individual who has suffered such a Almost all colds clear up in less than two weeks without
severe brain injury may remain in a coma indefinitely. complications.
This condition is termed persistent vegetative state.
Outcome from a coma is therefore quite variable and Description
depends a great deal on the cause and duration of the coma.
Colds,sometimes called rhinovirus or coronavirus
In the case of drug poisonings, extremely high rates of
infections,are the most common illness to strike any part
recovery can be expected following prompt medical atten-
of the body. It is estimated that the average person has
tion. Patients who have suffered head injuries tend to do
more than 50 colds during a lifetime. Anyone can get a
better than do patients whose coma was caused by other
cold, although pre-school and grade school children
types of medical illnesses. Leaving out those people whose
catch them more frequently than adolescents and adults.
coma followed drug poisoning,only about 15% of patients
Repeated exposure to viruses causing colds creates par-
who remain in a coma for more than just a few hours make
tial immunity.
a good recovery. Those adult patients who remain in a
coma for greater than four weeks have almost no chance of Although most colds resolve on their own without
eventually regaining their previous level of functioning. On complications, they are a leading cause of visits to the
the other hand,children and young adults have regained doctor and of time lost from work and school. Treating
functioning even after two months in a coma. symptoms of the common cold has given rise to a multi-
million dollar industry in over-the-counter medications.
Resources Cold season in the United States begins in early
BOOKS autumn and extends through early spring. Although it is
Guberman,Alan. An Introduction to Clinical Neurology. not true that getting wet or being in a draft causes a cold
Boston:Little,Brown and Co.,1994. (a person has to come in contact with the virus to catch a
Liebman,Michael. Neuroanatomy Made Easy and Under- cold),certain conditions may lead to increased suscepti-
standable.Baltimore:University Park Press,1991. bility. These include:
Ropper,Allan H.,and Joseph B. Martin. “Acute Confusional
•fatigue and overwork
States and Coma.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York: •emotional stress
McGraw-Hill,1997.
•poor nutrition
PERIODICALS
•smoking
Engeler,Amy. “A Life on Hold:What a Coma Really Looks
Like.”Redbook,July 1996,72+. •living or working in crowded conditions
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 869
Common
cold
Colds make the upper respiratory system less resis- eyes, tiredness, and lack of appetite. The cough that
tant to bacterial infection. Secondary bacterial infection accompanies a cold is usually intermittent and dry.
may lead to middle ear infection,bronchitis,pneumo-
Most people begin to feel better four to five days
nia,sinus infection,or strep throat. People with chronic
after their cold symptoms become noticeable. All symp-
lung disease,asthma,diabetes,or a weakened immune
toms are generally gone within ten days,except for a dry
system are more likely to develop these complications.
cough that may linger for up to three weeks.
Colds make people more susceptible to bacterial
Causes and symptoms
infections such as strep throat,middle ear infections,and
Colds are caused by more than 200 different viruses. sinus infections. A person whose cold does not begin to
The most common groups are rhinoviruses and coron- improve within a week; or who experiences chest pain,
aviruses. Different groups of viruses are more infectious fever for more than a few days, difficulty breathing,
at different seasons of the year, but knowing the exact bluish lips or fingernails,a cough that brings up green-
virus causing the cold is not important in treatment. ish-yellow or grayish sputum,skin rash,swollen glands,
or whitish spots on the tonsils or throat should consult a
People with colds are contagious during the first two
doctor to see if they have acquired a secondary bacterial
to four days of the infection. Colds pass from person to
infection that needs to be treated with an antibiotic.
person in several ways. When an infected person coughs,
sneezes,or speaks,tiny fluid droplets containing the virus People who have emphysema,chronic lung disease,
are expelled. If these are breathed in by other people,the diabetes, or a weakened immune system—either from
virus may establish itself in their noses and airways. diseases such as AIDS or leukemia, or as the result of
medications,(corticosteroids,chemotherapydrugs)—
Colds may also be passed through direct contact. If a
should consult their doctor if they get a cold. People with
person with a cold touches his runny nose or watery eyes,
these health problems are more likely to get a secondary
then shakes hands with another person some of the virus is
infection.
transferred to the uninfected person. If that person then
touches his mouth,nose,or eyes,the virus is transferred to
Diagnosis
an environment where it can reproduce and cause a cold.
Colds are diagnosed by observing a person’s symp-
Finally, cold viruses can be spread through inani-
toms. There are no laboratory tests readily available to
mate objects (door knobs,telephones,toys) that become
detect the cold virus. However,a doctor may do a throat
contaminated with the virus. This is a common method
cultureor blood test to rule out a secondary infection.
of transmission in child care centers. If a child with a
cold touches his runny nose,then plays with a toy,some Influenzais sometimes confused with a cold,but flu
of the virus may be transferred to the toy. When another causes much more severe symptoms and generally a
child plays with the toy a short time later,he may pick up fever. Allergies to molds or pollens also can make the
some of the virus on his hands. The second child then nose run. Allergies are usually more persistent than the
touches his contaminated hands to his eyes, nose, or common cold. An allergist can do tests to determine if
mouth and transfers some of the cold virus to himself. the cold-like symptoms are being caused by an allergic
reaction. Also,some people get a runny nose when they
Once acquired,the cold virus attaches itself to the
go outside in winter and breathe cold air. This type of
lining of the nasal passages and sinuses. This causes the
runny nose is not a symptom of a cold.
infected cells to release a chemical called histamine. His-
tamine increases the blood flow to the infected cells,
causing swelling,congestion,and increased mucus pro- Treatment
duction. Within one to three days the infected person
There are no medicines that will cure the common
begins to show cold symptoms.
cold. Given time,the body’s immune system will make
The first cold symptoms are a tickle in the throat, antibodies to fight the infection, and the cold will be
runny nose,and sneezing. The initial discharge from the resolved without any intervention. Antibioticsare use-
nose is clear and thin. Later it changes to a thick yellow less against a cold. However, a great deal of money is
or greenish discharge. Most adults do not develop a fever spent by pharmaceutical companies in the United States
when they catch a cold. Young children may develop a promoting products designed to relieve cold symptoms.
low fever of up to 102°F (38.9°C). These products usually contain antihistamines,decon-
gestants,and/or pain relievers.
In addition to a runny nose and fever,signs of a cold
include coughing,sneezing,nasal congestion,headache, Antihistamines block the action of the chemical hist-
muscle ache, chills, sore throat, hoarseness, watery amine that is produced when the cold virus invades the
870 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
dloc
nommoC
cells lining the nasal passages. Histamine increases
blood flow and causes the cells to swell. Antihistamines
are taken to relieve the symptoms of sneezing, runny
nose, itchy eyes, and congestion. Side effects are dry
mouth and drowsiness, especially with the first few
doses. Antihistamines should not be taken by people who
are driving or operating dangerous equipment. Some
people have allergic reactions to antihistamines. Com-
mon over-the-counter antihistamines include Chlor-
Trimeton, Dimetapp, Tavist, and Actifed. The generic
name for two common antihistamines are chlorpheni-
ramine and diphenhydramine.
Care should be taken not to exceed the recommend-
Decongestants work to constrict the blood flow to
ed dosages,especially when combination medications or
the vessels in the nose. This can shrink the tissue,reduce
nasal sprays are taken. Individuals should determine
congestion,and open inflamed nasal passages,making
whether they wish to use any of these drugs. None of
breathing easier. Decongestants can make people feel jit-
them shorten or cure a cold. At best they help a person
tery or keep them from sleeping. They should not be used
feel more comfortable. People who are confused about
by people with heart disease, high blood pressure, or
the drugs in any over-the-counter cold remedies should
glaucoma. Some common decongestants are Neo-
ask their pharmacist for an explanation.
Synepherine,Novafed,and Sudafed. The generic names
of common decongestants include phenylephrine, In addition to the optional use of over the counter
phenylpropanolamine, pseudoephedrine, and in nasal cold remedies,there are some self-care steps that people
sprays naphazoline,oxymetazoline and xylometazoline. can take to ease their discomfort. These include:
•drinking plenty of fluids, but avoiding acidic juices,
Many over the counter medications are combina-
which may irritate the throat
tions of both antihistamines and decongestants; an ache
and pain reliever, such as acetaminophen (Datril, •gargling with warm salt water—made by adding one
Tylenol,Panadol) or ibuprofen (Advil,Nuprin,Motrin, teaspoon of salt to 8 oz of water—for a sore throat
Medipren); and a cough suppressant (dextromethor-
•not smoking
phan). Common combination medications include
•getting plenty of rest
Tylenol Cold and Flu, Triaminic, Sudafed Plus, and
Tavist D. Aspirinshould not be given to children with a •using a cool-mist room humidifier to ease congestion
cold because of its association with a risk of Reye’s syn- and sore throat
drome,a serious disease.
•rubbing Vaseline or other lubricant under the nose to
Nasal sprays and nose drops are other products pro- prevent irritation from frequent nose blowing
moted for reducing nasal congestion. These usually con- •for babies too young to blow their noses, the mucus
tain a decongestant,but the decongestant can act more should be suctioned gently with an infant nasal aspira-
quickly and strongly than ones found in pills or liquids tor,it may be necessary to soften the mucus first with a
because it is applied directly in the nose. Congestion few drops of salt water
returns after a few hours.
People can become dependent on nasal sprays and Alternative treatment
nose drops. If used for a long time, users may suffer
Alternative practitioners emphasize that people get
withdrawal symptoms when these products are discon-
colds because their immune systems are weak. They
tinued. Nasal sprays and nose drops should not be used
point out that everyone is exposed to cold viruses,but not
for more than a few days. Check the label for recommen-
everyone gets every cold. The difference seems to be in
dations on length and frequency of use.
the ability of the immune system to fight infection. Pre-
vention focuses on strengthening the immune system by
People react differently to different cold medications
eating a healthy diet low in sugars and high in fresh fruits
and may find some more helpful than others. A medica-
and vegetables,practicing meditationto reduce stress,
tion may be effective initially,then lose some of its effec-
and getting regular moderate exercise.
tiveness. Children sometimes react differently than
adults. Over-the-counter cold remedies should not be Once cold symptoms appear, some naturopathic
given to infants without consulting a doctor first. practitioners believe the symptoms should be allowed to
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 871
Common
cold
Cold Remedies
Symptoms Side effects
Antihistamines Congestion Drowsiness
Itchy eyes Dry mouth and eyes
Runny nose
Sneezing
Stuffy nose
Decongestants Congestion Insomnia
Stuffy nose Rapid heart beat Stimulation
The mechanism by which zinc worked was not clear,but
KEY TERMS additional studies are underway.
Bronchial tubes—The major airways to the lungs Prognosis
and their main branches.
Given time, the body will make antibodies to cure
Coronavirus—a genus of viruses that cause respi-
itself of a cold. Most colds last a week to 10 days. Most
ratory disease and gastroenteritis.
people start feeling better within four or five days. Occa-
Corticosteroids—A group of hormones produced sionally a cold will lead to a secondary bacterial infection
naturally by the adrenal gland or manufactured that causes strep throat, bronchitis, pneumonia, sinus
synthetically. They are often used to treat inflam- infection,or a middle ear infection. These conditions usu-
mation. Examples include cortisone and pred- ally clear up rapidly when treated with an antibiotic.
nisone.
Eustachian tube—A thin tube between the middle Prevention
ear and the pharnyx. Its purpose is to equalize
It is not possible to prevent colds because the viruses
pressure on either side of the ear drum.
that cause colds are common and highly infectious. How-
Rhinovirus—A virus that infects the upper respira- ever,there are some steps individuals can take to reduce
tory system and causes the common cold. their spread. These include:
•washing hands well and frequently, especially after
touching the nose or before handling food
•covering the mouth and nose when sneezing
run their course without interference. Others suggest the
following: •disposing of used tissues properly
•avoiding close contact with someone who has a cold
•Inhaling a steaming mixture of lemon oil, thyme oil,
during the first two to four days of their infection
eucalyptus, and tea tree oil (Melaleuca spp.). (Aro-
matherapy) •not sharing food,eating utensils,or cups with anyone
•avoiding crowded places where cold germs can spread
•Gargling with a mixture of water, salt, and turmeric
powder or astringents such as alum,sumac,sage,and •eating a healthy diet and getting adequate sleep
bayberry to ease a sore throat. (Ayurvedic medicine)
Resources
•Taking coneflower (Echinacea spp.) or goldenseal
(Hydrastis canadensis). Other useful herbs to reduce BOOKS
symptoms include yarrow (Achillea millefolium),eye- Burton Goldberg Group. “Colds and Flu.”In Alternative Medi-
bright (Euphrasia officinalis),garlic (Allium sativum), cine:The Definitive Guide,ed. James Strohecker.
and onions (Allium cepa). (Herbal) Puyallup,WA:Future Medicine Publishing,1994.
Castleman,Michael. “Cold and Flu Therapy.”In Nature’s
•Microdoses of Viscue album,Natrum muriaticum,Alli- Cures.Emmaus,PA:Rodale Press,1996.
um cepa,or Nux vomica. (Homeopathy) Silverstein Alvin,et al. Common Cold and Flu (Diseases and
People).Springfield,MA:Enslow Publishers,1996.
•Taking yin chiao (sometimes transliterated as yinquiao)
tablets that contain honeysuckle and forsythia when
Tish Davidson
symptoms appear. Natural herb loquat syrup for cough
and sinus congestion and Chinese ephedra (ma-huang)
for runny nose. (Chinese traditional medicine)
•The use of zinc lozenges every two hours along with
high doses of vitamin C is suggested. Some practition- Common variable
ers also suggest eliminating dairy products for the dura- immunodeficiency
tion of the cold. (Nutritional therapy).
Definition
The use of zinc lozenges may be moving toward
acceptance by practitioners of traditional medicine. In Common variable immunodeficiencyis an immun-
1996 the Cleveland Clinic tested zinc gluconate lozenges odeficiency disorder characterized by a low level of anti-
and found using zinc in the first 24 hours after cold bodies. Patients with this disease are subject to recurring
symptoms occurred shortened the duration of symptoms. infections.
872 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ycneicifedonummi
elbairav
nommoC
Description Treatment
Immunodeficiency means that the immune system is There is no treatment that will cure the disorder.
deficient in one or more of its components and is unable Treatment for common variable immunodeficiency aims
to respond effectively. Common variable immunodefi- at boosting the body’s immune response and preventing
ciency is the most common of the immunodeficiency dis- or controlling infections. Immune serum,obtained from
orders. Patients with this disease have frequent infec- donated blood,is given as a source of antibodies to boost
tions,especially those caused by the same microorgan- the immune response. Immune serum is obtained from
ism. Recurring infections are an indication that the donated blood. It contains whatever antibodies the
immune system is not responding normally and develop- donors had in their blood. Consequently,it may not con-
ing immunity to reinfection. Patients with common vari- tain all the antibodies that the patient needs and may lack
able immunodeficiency have a normal number of B cells, antibodies specific for some of the recurring infections
the lymphocytes that make antibodies. In approximately that these patients suffer. Antibioticsare used routinely
one-third of these patients,the number of B cells in the at the first sign of an infection to help the patient elimi-
blood that have IgG antibodies on their surface is lower nate infectious microorganisms.
than normal,but there are normal numbers of B cells in
their bone marrow. B cells with IgG antibodies on their
Prognosis
surface are capable of responding to microorganisms.
The lack of IgG on the surface of the B cells means that With good medical care,people with common vari-
they are not prepared to fight infection. The T-cell lym- able immunodeficiency usually have a normal life span.
phocytes,those cells responsible for cellular immunity,
are usually normal, although some cell signal compo-
Prevention
nents may be lacking.
The disease itself cannot be prevented,but patients and
their families can take precautions to prevent the recurrent
Causes and symptoms
infections commonly associated with it. For example,good
The cause of common variable immunodeficiency is hygiene and nutritionare important,as is avoiding crowds
not known,although some forms seem to be hereditary. or other people who have active infections.
The main symptom is recurring infections that tend to be
chronic rather than acute. Patients may also develop diar-
Resources
rheaand,as a consequence of the diarrhea,do not absorb
food efficiently. This can lead to malnourishment that can BOOKS
Abbas,Abul K.,Andrew H. Lichtman,and Jordan S. Pober.
aggravate the disorder. Common variable immunodefi-
Cellular and Molecular Immunology.3rd ed. Philadel-
ciency normally appears in children after the age of 10.
phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
Autoimmune disorderssuch as rheumatoid arthritis,
Professional Guide to Diseases.5th ed. Springhouse,PA:
thyroiditis,and systemic lupus erythematosusand cer-
Springhouse Corporation,1995.
tain cancers such as lymphomas and leukemias may be
associated with common variable immunodeficiency.
John T. Lohr,PhD
Diagnosis
As is true of most immunodeficiency disorders,one
of the first signs that the patient has the condition is
recurrent infections. Patients with common variable Complement deficiencies
immunodeficiency are subject to recurrent infections,
Definition
especially those caused by microbes that don’t normally
cause disease in normal persons. The main diagnostic Complement deficiencies are a group of disorders in
test that distinguishes common variable immunodeficien- which there is a reduced level of specific proteins,com-
cy from other immunodeficiency diseases is the low anti- plement,involved in proper immune functioning.
body level despite the normal number of B cells. Anti-
body levels are tested in the serum by a procedure called
Description
electrophoresis. This procedure both quantifies the
amount of antibody present and identifies the various Complement plays several functions in immunity. It
classes of antibodies. The main class of antibody for can poke holes in bacteria,kill bacteria that are first tar-
fighting infectious diseases is IgG. geted by antibodies,or,working with antibodies,point
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 873
Complement
deficiencies
ple remain healthy with no symptoms at all. Others,who
KEY TERMS suffer from frequent infections,may develop a high fever,
diarrhea, headaches with a stiff neck, or a cough with
Autoimmune diseases—A group of diseases, like chest pain. If an autoimmune disease develops,like lupus,
rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythe- the person may lose weight,suffer from a rash,and have
matosus, in which immune cells turn on the body, joint pain. Other symptoms of complement deficiency dis-
attacking various tissues and organs. eases (like hereditary angioedema,paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria, or leukocyte adhesion deficiency syn-
Hereditary angioedema—A complement deficien-
drome) include abdominal and back pain,skin infections,
cy characterized by lymphatic vessel blockages
edemaor swelling of the face and red bumps on the skin.
that cause temporary swelling (edema) of areas of
the skin, mucous membranes, and, sometimes,
internal organs. Diagnosis
Leucocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome—A There are blood tests that determine the activity of the
complement deficiency syndrome characterized complement system. The two most common screening
by recurrent infections of the skin, mucous mem- tests,CH50 and APH50,tell the physician which group of
branes, and gastrointestinal tract and the absence complement components have a defect. More specific
of pus formation. This disorder is sometimes blood tests for the individual complement components
apparent at birth when separation of the umbilical (e.g.,C3 or C4 complement) are then performed. Other
cord takes longer than normal. specialized blood tests,including C1 esterase level,Ham
Meningitis—An inflammation of the lining sur- test,and a white blood count,may also be performed.
rounding the brain and spinal cord.
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)—A Treatment
rare complement disorder characterized by
There is no way to treat the actual complement defi-
episodes of red blood cell destruction (hemolysis)
ciency. However,antibioticsare used to treat infections
and blood in the urine (hemoglobinuria) that is
and vaccinations are given to reduce the risk of disease.
worse at night.
Often, the person is vaccinated against infections that
Systemic lupus erythematosus—An autoimmune include influenza,pneumonia,and meningitis. In some
disease in which the immune system attacks the cases,(e.g.,a specific disease called paroxysmal noctur-
body’s connective tissue. A butterfly-shaped facial nal hemoglobinuria [PNH]), a bone marrow transplant
rash is characteristic. may be recommended.
White blood cells—Cells that are key in immune
defense. There are various types, including those
Alternative treatment
that engulf and kill invading bacteria.
There is no alternative treatment for complement
problems.
out which bacteria need to be engulfed by white blood
Prognosis
cells. Without sufficient complement,the body is prone
to frequent infections,like pneumoniaor meningitis,or Since complement deficiencies include a wide range
other illnesses,including autoimmune diseases,like sys- of disorders,the prognoses can also vary widely. Some
temic lupus erythematosus. Since there are more than patients remain healthy their entire life. Others are hospi-
20 different types of complement,the disease that results talized frequently because of infections which, if not
depends on the specific complement that is lacking. properly treated, can be fatal. Those with autoimmune
diseases could have a normal life expectancy. There are
some complement deficiencies,that have a high mortali-
Cause and symptoms
ty rate. In those cases,deathmay occur within 10 years
A defect in the complement system can be genetic,but after diagnosis.
a secondary complement deficiency can also result from
ailments that involve a lot of protein loss,including serious
Prevention
burns,liver or kidney disease,and autoimmune diseases,
like lupus. Symptoms vary depending on the specific com- There is currently no way to prevent complement
plement deficiency and the disease that results. Some peo- deficiencies.
874 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
seicneicifed
tnemelpmoC
Resources neys, adrenal glands, spleen, and lymph nodes, and
extremities.
BOOKS
McLean,Robert H.,and Thomas R. Welch. “Complement.”In •Aorta scans. CT scans can focus on the thoracic or
Handbook of Human Immunology,ed. Mary S. Leffell,et abdominal aorta to locate aneurysms and other possible
al. Boca Raton:CRC Press,1997. aortic diseases.
PERIODICALS •Chest scans. CT scans of the chest are useful in distin-
“Complement Deficiency States.”Immune Deficiency and guishing tumors and in detailing accumulation of fluid
Allied Disorders Newsletter2 (June 1996):1-6. in chest infections.
ORGANIZATIONS
Immune Deficiency Foundation. 25 W. Chesapeake Ave.,Suite Precautions
206,Towson,MD 21204. (800) 296-4433. <http://www. Pregnant women or those who could possibly be
primaryimmune.org>.
pregnant should not have a CT scan unless the diagnostic
benefits outweigh the risks. Pregnant patients should par-
OTHER
“The Clinical Presentation of the Primary Immunodeficiency ticularly avoid full body or abdominal scans. If the exam
Diseases.”International Patient Organization for Patient’s is necessary for obstetrics purposes, technologists are
with Primary Immunodeficiences.<http://www.ipopi.org>. instructed not to repeat films if there are errors. Pregnant
patients receiving CT or any x-ray exam away from the
Jeanine Barone,Physiologist abdominal area may be protected by a lead apron; most
radiation,known as scatter,travels through the body and
Complete blood count see Blood count is not blocked by the apron.
Contrast agents are often used in CT exams and the
use of these agents should be discussed with the medical
professional prior to the procedure. Patients should be
asked to sign a consent form concerning the administra-
Computed tomography scans tion of contrast. One of the common contrast agents,
iodine, can cause allergic reactions. Patients who are
Definition known to be allergic to iodine (or shellfish) should
inform the physician prior to the CT scan.
Computed tomography (CT) scans are completed
with the use of a 360-degree x-ray beam and computer
Description
production of images. These scans allow for cross-
sectional views of body organs and tissues. Computed tomography, also called CT scan, CAT
scan,or computerized axial tomography,is a combina-
tion of focused x-ray beams and computerized produc-
Purpose
tion of an image. Introduced in the early 1970s,this radi-
CT scans are used to image a wide variety of body ologic procedure has advanced rapidly and is now widely
structures and internal organs. Since the 1990s, CT used,sometimes in the place of standard x rays.
equipment has become more affordable and available. In
some diagnoses,CT scans have become the first imaging CT equipment
exam of choice. Because the computerized image is so
A CT scan may be performed in a hospital or outpa-
sharp,focused,and three-dimensional,many tissues can
tient imaging center. Although the equipment looks large
be better differentiated than on standard x rays. Common
and intimidating,it is very sophisticated and fairly com-
CT indications include:
fortable. The patient is asked to lie on a gantry,or narrow
•Sinus studies. The CT scan can show details of sinusi- table,that slides into the center of the scanner. The scan-
tisand bone fractures. Physicians may order a CT of ner looks like a doughnut and is round in the middle,
the sinuses to provide an accurate map for surgery. which allows the x-ray beam to rotate around the patient.
•Brain studies. Brain scans can detect hematomas, The scanner section may also be tilted slightly to allow
tumors,and strokes. The introduction of CT scanning, for certain cross-sectional angles.
especially spiral CT,has helped reduce the need for more
invasive procedures such as cerebral angiography. CT procedure
•Body scans. CT scans of the body will often be used The patient will feel the gantry move very slightly as
to observe abdominal organs, such as the liver, kid- the precise adjustments for each sectional image are
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 875
Computed
tomography
scans
gastroenterology procedures. The patient may drink this
contrast,or receive it in an enema. Oral and rectal con-
trast are usually given when examining the abdomen or
cells, and not given when scanning the brain or chest.
Iodine is the most widely used intravenous contrast agent
and is given through an intravenous needle.
If contrast agents are used in the CT exam,these will
be administered several minutes before the study begins.
Abdominal CT patients may be asked to drink a contrast
medium. Some patients may experience a salty taste,flush-
ing of the face,warmth or slight nausea,or hivesfrom an
intravenous contrast injection. Technologists and radiolo-
gists have equipment and training to help patients through
these minor reactions and to handle more severe reactions.
Severe reactions to contrast are rare,but do occur.
Spiral CT
made. A technologist watches the procedure from a win-
dow and views the images on a computer screen. Spiral CT,also called helical CT,is a newer version
of CT scanning which is continuous in motion and
It is essential that the patient lie very still during the
allows for three-dimensional recreation of images. For
procedure to prevent motion blurring. In some studies,
example,traditional CT allows the technologist to take
such as chest CTs,the patient will be asked to hold his or
slices at very small and precise intervals one after the
her breath during image capture.
other. Spiral CT allows for a continuous flow of images,
Following the procedure, films of the images are without stopping the scanner to move to the next image
usually printed for the radiologist and referring physician slice. A major advantage of spiral CT is the ability to
to review. A radiologist can also interpret CT exams on a reconstruct images anywhere along the length of the
special computer screen. The procedure time will vary in study area. The procedure also speeds up the imaging
length depending on the area being imaged. Average process,meaning less time for the patient to lie still. The
study times are from 30 to 60 minutes. Some patients ability to image contrast more rapidly after it is injected,
may be concerned about claustrophobia,but the width of when it is at its highest level,is another advantage of spi-
the “doughnut”portion of the scanner is such that many ral CT’s high speed.
patients can be reassured of openness.
Some facilities will have both spiral and convention-
al CT available. Although spiral is more advantageous
The CT image
for many applications,conventional CT is still a superior
While traditional x rays image organs in two dimen- and precise method for imaging many tissues and struc-
sions,with the possibility that organs in the front of the tures. The physician will evaluate which type of CT
body are superimposed over those in the back,CT scans works best for the specific exam purpose.
allow for a more three-dimensional effect. Some have
compared CT images to slices in a loaf of bread. Precise Preparation
sections of the body can be located and imaged as cross-
sectional views. The screen before the technologist If a contrast medium is administered, the patient
shows a computer’s analysis of each section detected by may be asked to fast from about four to six hours prior to
the x-ray beam. Thus,various densities of tissue can be the procedure. Patients will usually be given a gown (like
easily distinguished. a typical hospital gown) to be worn during the procedure.
All metal and jewelry should be removed to avoid arti-
facts on the film.
Contrast agents
Contrast agents are often used in CT exams and in
Aftercare
other radiology procedures to illuminate certain details
of anatomy which may not be easily seen. Some con- No aftercare is generally required following a CT
trasts are natural, such as air or water. Other times, a scan. Immediately following the exam,the technologist
water-based contrast agent is administered for specific will continue to watch the patient for possible adverse
diagnostic purposes. Barium sulfate is commonly used in contrast reactions. Patients are instructed to advise the
876 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snacs
yhpargomot
detupmoC
Colorized CT scan of human abdomen—aorta is dead cen-
ter/red (Photo Researchers.Reproduced by permission.)
technologist of any symptoms,particularly respiratory
difficulty. The site of contrast injection will be bandaged
and may feel tender following the exam. Hives may
develop later and usually do not require treatment.
Risks
Radiation exposure from a CT scan is similar to,
though higher than, that of a conventional x ray.
Although this is a risk to pregnant women,the exposure
to other adults is minimal and should produce no effects.
Although severe contrast reactions are rare, they are a
risk of many CT procedures.
Normal results
Normal findings on a CT exam show bone,the most
dense tissue,as white areas. Tissues and fat will show as
various shades of gray,and fluids will be gray or black.
Air will also look black. Intravenous,oral,and rectal con-
image may indicate a tumor or hematoma within the brain
trast appear as white areas. The radiologist can determine
and skull area. Different types of tumors can be identified
if tissues and organs appear normal by the sensitivity of
by the presence of edema, by the tissue’s density, or by
the gray shadows. In CT,the images that can cut through
studying blood vessel location and activity. The speed and
a section of tissue or organ provide three-dimensional
convenience of CT often allows for detection of hemorrhage
viewing for the radiologist and referring physician.
before symptoms even occur. Congenital abnormalities in
children,such as hydrocephalus,may also be confirmed
Abnormal results with CT. Hydrocephalus is suggested by enlargement of the
fluid structures called ventricles of the brain.
Abnormal results may show different characteristics
of tissues within organs. Accumulations of blood or other
fluids where they do not belong may be detected. Radiol- Body scans
ogists can differentiate among types of tumors through-
The body scan can identify abnormal body structures
out the body by viewing details of their makeup.
and organs. Throughout the body, a CT may indicate
tumors or cysts,enlarged lymph nodes,abnormal collec-
Sinus studies tions of fluids, blood or fat, and metastasis of cancer.
Tumors resulting from metastasis are different in makeup
The increasing availability and lowered cost of CT
than primary tumors,or those that originate in the loca-
scanning has led to its increased use in sinus studies,
tion of study. Fractures or damage to soft tissues and liga-
either as a replacement for a sinus x ray or as a follow-up
ments will be more easily seen on the sensitive images
to an abnormal sinus radiograph. The sensitivity of CT
produced by CT scanning,though CT is not usually done
allows for location of areas of sinus infection,particularly
for these. Liver conditions,such as cirrhosisor abscessed
chronic infection. CT scans can show the extent and loca-
or fatty liver,may be observed on the body scan.
tion of tiny fractures to the sinus and nasal bones. Foreign
bodies in the sinus and nasal area are also easily detected
by CT. CT imaging of the sinuses is important in evaluat- CT of the aorta
ing trauma or disease of the sphenoid bone (the wedge
CT provides the ability to see and measure the thick-
shaped bone at the base of the skull). Sinus tumors will
ness of the aortal wall,which is very helpful in diagnos-
show as shades of gray indicating the difference in their
ing aortic aneurysms. The use of contrast will help see
density from that of normal tissues in the area.
details within the aorta. In addition,density can identify
calcification,and this helps differentiate between acute
Brain studies
and chronic problems. An abnormal CT scan may indi-
The precise differences in density allowed by CT scan cate signs of aortic clots. Aortic rupture is suggested by
can clearly show tumors,strokes,or lesions in the brain area signs such as a hematoma around the aorta or the escape
as altered densities. These lighter or darker areas on the of blood from its cavity.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 877
Computed
tomography
scans
Computerized CT scan of facial sinuses.(Pascal Goet-
gheluck.Photo Researchers.Reproduced by permission.)
PERIODICALS
KEY TERMS Papatheofanis,Frank J. “Helical CT and Pulmonary Disease.”
Decisions in Imaging Economics(Jan./Feb. 1997):61-63.
Aneurysm—The bulging of the blood vessel wall. ORGANIZATIONS
Aortic aneurysms are the most dangerous. American College of Radiology. 1891 Preston White Drive,
Aneurysms can break and cause bleeding. Reston,VA 22091. (800) 227-5463. <http://www.acr.org>.
Contrast (agent, medium)—A substance injected
Teresa Norris,RN
into the body that illuminates certain structures
that would otherwise be hard to see on the radi-
Computerized axial tomography see
ograph (film).
Computed tomography scans
Gantry—A name for the couch or table used in a
CT scan. The patient lies on the gantry while it
slides into the x-ray scanner portion.
Hematoma—A collection of blood that has
escaped from the vessels. It may clot and harden, Concussion
causing pain to the patient.
Definition
Hydrocephalus—A collection of fluid on or
around the brain. The pressure from the spinal Concussion is a trauma-induced change in mental
fluid causes the ventricles to widen. status,with confusion and amnesia,and with or without
Metastasis—Secondary cancer, or cancer that has a brief loss of consciousness.
spread from one body organ or tissue to another.
Radiologist—A medical doctor specially trained in Description
radiology (x ray) interpretation and its use in the
A concussion occurs when the head hits or is hit by
diagnosis of disease and injury.
an object,or when the brain is jarred against the skull,
Spiral CT—Also referred to as helical CT, this
with sufficient force to cause temporary loss of function
method allows for continuous 360-degree x-ray
in the higher centers of the brain. The injured person may
image capture.
remain conscious or lose consciousness briefly, and is
Thoracic—Refers to the chest area. The thorax disoriented for some minutes after the blow. According
runs between the abdomen and neck and is to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
encased in the ribs. approximately 300,000 people sustain mild to moderate
sports-related brain injuries each year, most of them
young men between 16 and 25.
While concussion usually resolves on its own with-
Chest scans
out lasting effect, it can set the stage for a much more
In addition to those findings that may indicate aortic serious condition. “Second impact syndrome” occurs
aneurysms,chest CT studies can show other problems in when a person with a concussion,even a very mild one,
the heart and lungs,and distinguish between an aortic suffers a second blow before fully recovering from the
aneurysmand a tumor adjacent to the aorta. The com- first. The brain swelling and increased intracranial pres-
puter will not only show differences between air,water, sure that can result is potentially fatal. More than 20 such
tissues,and bone,but will also assign numerical values cases have been reported since the syndrome was first
to the various densities. Coin-sized lesions in the lungs described in 1984.
may be indicative of tuberculosis or tumors. CT will
help distinguish among the two. Enlarged lymph nodes
Causes and symptoms
in the chest area may indicate Hodgkin’s disease. Spiral
CT is particularly effective at identifying pulmonary Causes
emboli (clots in the lung’s blood vessels).
Most concussions are caused by motor vehicle acci-
dents and sports injuries. In motor vehicle accidents,
Resources concussion can occur without an actual blow to the head.
Instead, concussion occurs because the skull suddenly
BOOKS
Illustrated Guide to Diagnostic Tests.Ed. J. A. Lewis. Spring- decelerates or stops,which causes the brain to be jarred
house,PA:Springhouse Corp. 1994. against the skull. Contact sports, especially football,
878 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noissucnoC
hockey,and boxing,are among those most likely to lead
to concussion. Other significant causes include falls,col- KEY TERMS
lisions,or blows due to bicycling,horseback riding,ski-
ing,and soccer. Amnesia—A loss of memory that may be caused
The risk of concussion from football is extremely by brain injury, such as concussion.
high, especially at the high school level. Studies show Parkinsonism—A neurological disorder that
that approximately one in five players suffer concussion includes a fine tremor, muscular weakness and
or more serious brain injury during their brief high- rigidity, and an altered way of walking.
school careers. The rate at the collegiate level is approxi-
mately 1 in 20. Rates for hockey players are not known
as certainly,but are believed to be similar.
•Grade 1:no loss of consciousness,transient confusion,
Concussion and lasting brain damage is an especial-
and other symptoms that resolve within 15 minutes.
ly significant risk for boxers,since the goal of the sport
is,in fact,to deliver a concussion to the opponent. For •Grade 2:no loss of consciousness,transient confusion,
this reason, the American Academy of Neurology has and other symptoms that require more than 15 minutes
called for a ban on boxing. Repeated concussions over to resolve.
months or years can cause cumulative head injury. The •Grade 3:loss of consciousness for any period.
cumulative brain injuries suffered by most boxers can
Days or weeks after the accident, the person may
lead to permanent brain damage. Multiple blows to the
show signs of:
head can cause “punch-drunk” syndrome or dementia
pugilistica, as evidenced by Muhammed Ali, whose •headache
parkinsonism is a result of his career in the ring. •poor attention and concentration
Young children are likely to suffer concussions from •memory difficulties
falls or collisions on the playground or around the home. •anxiety
Child abuseis,unfortunately,another common cause of •depression
concussion.
•sleep disturbances
•light and noise intolerance
Symptoms
The occurrence of such symptoms is called “post-
Symptoms of concussion include: concussion syndrome.”
•headache
Diagnosis
•disorientation as to time,date,or place
It is very important for those attending a person with
•confusion
concussion to pay close attention to the person’s symp-
•dizziness
toms and progression immediately after the accident. The
•vacant stare or confused expression
duration of unconsciousness and degree of confusion are
•incoherent or incomprehensible speech very important indicators of the severity of the injury and
•incoordination or weakness help guide the diagnostic process and treatment decisions.
•amnesia for the events immediately preceding the blow A doctor, nurse, or emergency medical technician
•nausea or vomiting may make an immediate assessment based on the severi-
ty of the symptoms; a neurologic exam of the pupils,
•double vision
coordination, and sensation; and brief tests of orienta-
•ringing in the ears
tion,memory,and concentration. Those with very mild
These symptoms may last from several minutes to concussions may not need to be hospitalized or have
several hours. More severe or longer-lasting symptoms expensive diagnostic tests. Questionable or more severe
may indicate more severe brain injury. The person with a cases may require computed tomography scan(CT) or
concussion may or may not lose consciousness from the magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) scans to look for
blow; if so, it will be for several minutes at the most. brain injury.
More prolonged unconsciousness indicates more severe
brain injury. Treatment
The severity of concussion is graded on a three-point The symptoms of concussion usually clear quickly
scale,used as a basis for treatment decisions. and without lasting effect, if no further injury is sus-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 879
Concussion
tained during the healing process. Guidelines for return- Prognosis
ing to sports activities are based on the severity of the
Concussion usually leaves no lasting neurological
concussion.
problems. Nonetheless, symptoms of post-concussion
A grade 1 concussion can usually be treated with syndromemay last for weeks or even months.
rest and continued observation alone. The person may Studies of concussion in contact sports have shown
return to sports activities that same day, but only after that the risk of sustaining a second concussion is even
examination by a trained professional, and after all greater than it was for the first if the person continues to
symptoms have completely resolved. If the person sus- engage in the sport.
tains a second concussion of any severity that same day,
he or she should not be allowed to continue contact
Prevention
sports until he or she has been symptom-free, during
both rest and activity,for one week. Many cases of concussion can be prevented by using
appropriate protective equipment. This includes seat
A person with a grade 2 concussion must discontin- belts and air bags in automobiles,and helmets in all con-
ue sports activity for the day,should be evaluated by a tact sports. Helmets should also be worn when bicycling,
trained professional, and should be observed closely skiing,or horseback riding. Soccer players should avoid
throughout the day to make sure that all symptoms have heading the ball when it is kicked at high velocity from
completely cleared. Worsening of symptoms,or continu- close range. Playground equipment should be underlaid
ation of any symptoms beyond one week,indicates the with soft material,either sand or special matting.
need for a CT or MRI scan. Return to contact sports
The value of high-contact sports such as boxing,
should only occur after one week with no symptoms,
football,or hockey should be weighed against the high
both at rest and during activity,and following examina-
risk of brain injury during a young person’s participation
tion by a physician. Following a second grade 2 concus-
in the sport. Steering a child’s general enthusiasm for
sion, the person should remain symptom-free for two
sports into activities less apt to produce head impacts
weeks before resuming contact sports.
may reduce the likelihood of brain injury.
A person with a grade 3 concussion (involving any
loss of consciousness, no matter how brief) should be Resources
examined by a medical professional either on the scene or
BOOKS
in an emergency room. More severe symptoms may war-
Evans,R. Neurology and Trauma.W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
rant a CT or MRI scan,along with a thorough neurological
and physical exam. The person should be hospitalized if PERIODICALS
any abnormalities are found or if confusion persists. Pro- Quality Standards Subcommittee,American Academy of Neu-
rology. “Practice Parameter:The Management of Concus-
longed unconsciousness and worsening symptoms require
sion in Sports.”Neurology48 (Mar. 1997):581-585.
urgent neurosurgical evaluation or transfer to a trauma cen-
“Sports-Related Recurrent Brain Injuries—United States.”
ter. Following discharge from professional care,the patient
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,14 Mar. 1997,
is closely monitored for neurological symptoms which may
224-227.
arise or worsen. If headaches or other symptoms worsen or
last longer than one week,a CT or MRI scan should be per- ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Neurology. 1080 Montreal Ave.,St.
formed. Contact sports are avoided for one week following
Paul,MN 55116. (612) 695-1940. <http://www.aan.com>.
unconsciousness of only seconds,and for two weeks for
unconsciousness of a minute or more. A person receiving a Richard Robinson
second grade 3 concussion should avoid contact sports for
at least a month after all symptoms have cleared,and then
only with the approval of a physician. If signs of brain
swelling or bleeding are seen on a CT or MRI scan,the ath-
lete should not return to the sport for the rest of the season,
Condom
or even indefinitely.
Definition
For someone who has sustained a concussion of any
severity,it is critically important that he or she avoid the Male condoms are thin sheaths of latex (rubber),
possibility of another blow to the head until well after all polyurethane (plastic),or animal tissue that are rolled onto
symptoms have cleared to prevent second-impact syn- an erect penis immediately prior to intercourse. They are
drome. The guidelines above are designed to minimize commonly called “safes”or “rubbers.”Female condoms
the risk of this syndrome. are made of polyurethane and are inserted into the vaginal
880 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
modnoC
canal before sexual relations. The open end covers the out- male condom should not be snug on the tip of the penis. A
side of the vagina,and the closed ring fits over the cervix space of about 0.5 in should be left at the end to avoid the
(opening into the uterus). Both types of condoms collect possibility of it breaking during sexual intercourse. The
the male semen at ejaculation,acting as a barrier to fertil- penis must be withdrawn quickly after ejaculation to pre-
ization. Condoms also perform as barriers to the exchange vent the condom from falling off as the penis softens. The
of bodily fluids and are subsequently an important tool in condom should therefore always be removed while the
the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases(STDs). penis is still erect to prevent the sperm from spilling into
the vagina.
Purpose
Both male and female condoms are used to prevent Description
pregnancyand to protect against STDs such as human
Male condoms made from animal tissue and linen
immunodeficiencyvirus (HIV),gonorrhea,chlamydia,
have been in use for centuries. Latex condoms were
and syphilis. To accomplish these goals, the condom
introduced in the late 1800s and gained immediate pop-
must be applied and removed correctly.
ularity because they were inexpensive and effective. At
that time, they were primarily used to protect against
Precautions
STDs. A common complaint made by many consumers
Male and female condoms should not be used togeth- is that condoms reduce penis sensitivity and impair
er as there is a risk that one of them may come off. The orgasm. Both men and women may develop allergiesto
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 881
Condom
Penis
Condom
A condom is most effective when it is placed on the penis correctly without trapping air between the penis and the condom.
(Illustration by Argosy, Inc.)
tracted the disease when condoms were used with every
KEY TERMS instance of sexual intercourse. A similar 1993 study
showed that out of 171 couples with one HIV-positive
Ejaculate—To expel semen. partner, all but two individuals were protected against
HIV transmission with condom use. In addition to HIV,
Semen—The thick whitish liquid released from the
condoms provide effective transmission against gonor-
penis during sexual intercourse. It contains sperm
rhea,chlamydia,syphilis,chancroid,and trichomonia-
and other secretions.
sis. A measure of protection is also provided against
Sperm or spermatozoa—The part of the semen hepatitis Bvirus (HBV),human papillomavirus (HPV),
that is generative—can cause fertilization of the and herpes simplex virus (HSV).
female ovum.
Before purchasing a condom,check the expiration
Spermicide—An agent that is destructive to sperm. date. Prior to use, examine the condom for holes. If a
Vagina—The genital canal in the female, leading lubricant is going to be used, it should be water solu-
from the vulva to the uterus. ble because petroleum jellies, such as Vaseline, and
other oil based lubricants can weaken latex. It is also
important to note that condoms made from animal tis-
sue or plastic are not recommended as a protection
against STDs.
the latex. Consumer interest in female condoms has
been slight.
Resources
Male condoms may be purchased lubricated,ribbed,
or treated with spermicide (a chemical that kills sperm). OTHER
To be effective,condoms must be removed carefully so “The Condom.”Sexual Health InfoCenter.<http:///www.
as not to “spill”the contents into the vaginal canal. Con- sexhealth.org/infocenter/GuideSS/condoms.htm>.
doms that leak or break do not provide protection against “Condoms.”Planned Parenthood Page.<http://www.planned
parenthood.org/condoms/index.html>.
pregnancy or disease.
“The Female Condom.”Frontsake Health Center.2001.
If used correctly,male condoms have an effective- <http://www.nau.edu/~fronske/fcondom.html>.
ness rate of about 90% for preventing pregnancy, but “Spermicides,Condoms and Other Barrier Methods.”Epigee
this rate can be increased to about 99% if used with a Birth Control Guide.<http://epigee.netministries.org/
spermicide. (Several types of spermicides are available; guide/barrier.html>.
they can be purchased in the form of contraceptive
creams and jellies,foams,or films.) Benefits associated Stephanie Dionne
with this type of contraceptive device include easy avail-
ability (no prescription is required),convenience of use,
and lack of serious side effects. The primary disadvan-
tage is that sexual activity must be interrupted in order
to put the condom on.
Conduct disorder
Female condoms,when used correctly and at every
instance of intercourse,were shown to prevent pregnancy Definition
in over 95% of women surveyed over the course of six
Conduct disorder (CD) is a behavioral and emotion-
months. When used inconsistently,the female condom
al disorder of childhood and adolescence. Children with
was shown to have a failure rate of 21% in the same
conduct disorder act inappropriately, infringe on the
study. One benefit of the female condom is that it may be
rights of others,and violate the behavioral expectations
inserted immediately before sexual intercourse or up to
of others.
eight hours prior,so that sexual activity does not need to
be interrupted for its insertion. One study performed by a
manufacturer of the female condom indicated that Description
50–75% of couples in numerous countries found the bar-
CD is present in approximately 9% of boys and
rier acceptable for use.
2–9% of girls under the age of 18. Children with con-
Condoms provide better protection against STDs duct disorder act out aggressively and express anger
than any other contraceptive method. One study conduct- inappropriately. They engage in a variety of antisocial
ed in the 1990s indicated that out of 123 couples with and destructive acts,including violence towards people
one HIV-positive partner,not one healthy individual con- and animals, destruction of property, lying, stealing,
882 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
redrosid
tcudnoC
truancy, and running away from home. They often diagnosed with ADHD, a disorder characterized by a
begin using and abusing drugs and alcohol,and having persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity,also
sex at an early age. Irritability, temper tantrums, and have CD.
low self-esteem are common personality traits of chil-
CD is defined as a repetitive behavioral pattern of
dren with CD.
violating the rights of others or societal norms. Three of
the following criteria,or symptoms,are required over the
Causes and symptoms previous 12 months for a diagnosis of CD (one of the
three must have occurred in the past six months):
There are two sub-types of CD, one beginning in
childhood and the other in adolescence. There is no •bullies,threatens,or intimidates others
known cause. Researchers and physicians suggest that •picks fights
this disease may be caused by the following:
•has used a dangerous weapon
•poor parent-child relationships
•has been physically cruel to people
•dysfunctional families
•has been physically cruel to animals
•drug abuse
•has stolen while confronting a victim (for example,
•physical abuse
mugging or extortion)
•poor relationships with other children
•has forced someone into sexual activity
•cognitive problems leading to school failures
•has deliberately set a fire with the intention of causing
•brain damage damage
•biological defects •has deliberately destroyed property of others
Difficulty in school is an early sign of potential con-
•has broken into someone else’s house or car
duct disorder problems. While the patient’s IQ tends to
•frequently lies to get something or to avoid obligations
be in the normal range,they can have trouble with verbal
and abstract reasoning skills and may lag behind their •has stolen without confronting a victim or breaking and
classmates, and consequently, feel as if they don’t “fit entering (e.g.,shoplifting or forgery)
in.”The frustration and loss of self-esteem resulting from
•stays out at night; breaks curfew (beginning before 13
this academic and social inadequacy can trigger the
years of age)
development of CD.
•has run away from home overnight at least twice (or
A dysfunctional home environment can be another
once for a lengthy period)
major contributor to CD. An emotionally,physically,or
sexually abusive home environment,a family history of •is often truant from school (beginning before 13 years
antisocial personality disorder, or parental substance of age).
abuse can damage a child’s perceptions of himself and
put him on a path toward negative behavior. Other less
obvious environmental factors can also play a part in the Diagnosis
development of conduct disorder. Long-term studies
CD is diagnosed and treated by a number of social
have shown that maternal smokingduring pregnancy
workers,school counselors,psychiatrists,and psycholo-
may be linked to the development of CD in boys. Ani-
gists. Genuine diagnosis may require psychiatric exper-
mal and human studies point out that nicotine can have
tise to rule out such conditions as bipolar disorderor
undesirable effects on babies. These include altered
ADHD. A comprehensive evaluation of the child should
structure and function of their nervous systems,learning
ideally include interviews with the child and parents,a
deficits,and behavioral problems. In a study of 177 boys
full social and medical history,a cognitive evaluation,
ages seven-12 years, those with mothers who smoked
and a psychiatric exam. One or more clinical inventories
over one half a package of cigarettes daily while preg-
or scales may be used to assess the child for conduct dis-
nant were more apt to have a CD than those with moth-
order—including the Youth Self-Report, the Overt
ers who did not smoke.
Aggression Scale (OAS),Behavioral Assessment Sys-
Other conditions that may cause or co-exist with CD tem for Children (BASC), Child Behavior Checklist
include head injury, substance abuse disorder, major (CBCL), and Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Chil-
depressive disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity dren (DISC). The tests are verbal and/or written and are
disorder (ADHD). Thirty to fifty percent of children administered in both hospital and outpatient settings.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 883
Conduct
disorder
Prevention
KEY TERMS
A supportive,nurturing,and structured home envi-
ronment is believed to be the best defense against CD.
ADHD—Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; a
Children with learning disabilities and/or difficulties in
disorder characterized by a persistent pattern of
school should get immediate and appropriate academic
inattention and/or hyperactivity.
assistance. Addressing these problems when they first
Major depressive disorder—A mood disorder appear helps to prevent the frustration and low self-
characterized by profound feelings of sadness or esteem that may lead to CD later on.
despair.
Resources
BOOKS
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.4th ed.
Treatment
Washington,DC:American Psychiatric Association,
Treating conduct disorder requires an approach that 2000.
addresses both the child and his environment. Behavioral Maxmen,Jerrold S.,and Nicholas G. Ward. “Disorders Usually
First Diagnosed in Infancy,Childhood,or Adolescence.”
therapy and psychotherapy can help a child with CD to
In Essential Psychopathology and Its Treatment.2nd ed.
control his anger and develop new coping skills. Family
New York:W. W. Norton,1995.
group therapymay also be effective in some cases. Par-
Sholevar,Pirooz. Conduct Disorders in Childhood and Adoles-
ents should be counseled on how to set appropriate limits
cence.Washington,DC:American Psychiatric Press,Inc.,
with their child and be consistent and realistic when dis-
1995.
ciplining. If an abusive home life is at the root of the con-
duct problem,every effort should be made to move the PERIODICALS
child into a more supportive environment. Parent training Brodkin,Adele M.,and Melba Coleman. “He’s Trouble with a
programs are increasing in number. Capital T:What Can You Do for a Child with Conduct
Disorder?”Instructor,Apr. 1996:18-9.
For children with coexisting ADHD, substance Thompson,L. L.,et al. “Contribution of ADHD Symptoms to
abuse,depression,or learning disorders,treating these Substance Problems and Delinquency in Conduct-Disor-
conditions first is preferred,and may result in a signifi- dered Adolescents.”Journal of Abnormal Child Psycholo-
cant improvement to the CD condition. In all cases of gy24,no. 3 (June 1996):325-47.
CD,treatment should begin when symptoms first appear.
ORGANIZATIONS
Recent studies have shown Ritalin to be a useful drug for
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
both ADHD and CD.
(AACAP). 3615 Wisconsin Ave. NW,Washington,DC
20016. (202) 966-7300. <http://www.aacap.org>.
When aggressive behavior is severe, mood stabi-
Children and Adults with Attention Deficit Disorder
lizing medication, including lithium (Cibalith-S,
(CH.A.D.D.). 8181 Professional Place,Suite 201
Eskalith,Lithane,Lithobid,Lithonate,Lithotabs),car-
bamazepine (Tegretol, Atretol), and propranolol
Paula Anne Ford-Martin
(Inderal),may be an appropriate option for treating the
aggressive symptoms. However,placing the child into
Conductive hearing loss see Hearing loss
a structured setting or treatment program such as a psy-
chiatric hospital may be just as beneficial for easing Condylomata acuminata see Genital warts
aggression as medication.
Cone biopsy see Cervical conization
Prognosis
The prognosis for children with CD is not bright.
Follow-up studies of conduct disordered children have
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
shown a high incidence of antisocial personality disor-
der,affective illnesses,and chronic criminal behavior
Definition
later in life. However,proper treatment of co-existing
disorders, early identification and intervention, and Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is (CAH) a genetic
long-term support may improve the outlook signifi- disorder characterized by a deficiency in the hormones
cantly. cortisol and aldosterone and an over-production of the
884 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aisalprepyh
lanerda
latinegnoC
hormone androgen,which is present at birth and affects
sexual development.
Description
CAH is a form of adrenal insufficiency in which the
enzyme that produces two important adrenal steroid hor-
mones, cortisol and aldosterone, is deficient. Because
cortisol production is impeded,the adrenal gland instead
overproduces androgens (male steroid hormones).
Females with CAH are born with an enlarged clitoris and
normal internal reproductive tract structures. Males have
normal genitals at birth. CAH causes abnormal growth
for both sexes; patients will be tall as children and short
as adults. Females develop male characteristics, and unwanted body hair, or severe acne. However, some-
males experience premature sexual development. times there are no symptoms.
In its most severe form,called salt-wasting CAH,a
life-threatening adrenal crisis can occur if the disorder Diagnosis
is untreated. Adrenal crisis can cause dehydration,
CAH is diagnosed by a careful examination of the
shock,and deathwithin 14 days of birth. There is also
genitals and blood and urine tests that measure the hor-
a mild form of CAH that occurs later in childhood or
mones produced by the adrenal gland. A number of
young adult life in which patients have partial enzyme
states in the United States perform a hormonal test (a
deficiency.
heel prick blood test) for CAH and other inherited dis-
CAH,a genetic disorder,is the most common adren-
eases within a few days of birth. In questionable cases,
al gland disorder in infants and children,occurring in one
genetic testingcan provide a definitive diagnosis. For
in 10,000 total births worldwide. It affects both females
some forms of CAH, prenatal diagnosis is possible
and males. It is also called adrenogenital syndrome.
through chronic villus sampling in the first trimester and
by measuring certain hormones in the amniotic fluid
Causes and symptoms during the second trimester.
CAH is an inherited disorder. It is a recessive dis-
ease,which means that a child must inherit one copy of Treatment
the defective gene from each parent who is a carrier;
The goal of treatment for CAH is to return the
when two carriers have children,each pregnancycarries
androgen levels to normal. This is usually accomplished
a 25% risk of producing an affected child.
through drug therapy,although surgery is an alternative.
In females, CAH produces an enlarged clitoris at Lifelong treatment is required.
birth and masculinization of features as the child grows,
Drug therapy consists of a cortisol-like steroid med-
such as deepening of the voice,facial hair,and failure to
ication called a glucocorticoid. Oral hydrocortisone is
menstruate or abnormal periods at puberty. Females
prescribed for children, and prednisone or dexametha-
with severe CAH may be mistaken for males at birth. In
sone is prescribed for older patients. For patients with
males, the genitals are normal at birth, but the child
salt-wasting CAH, fludrocortisone, which acts like
becomes muscular, the penis enlarges, pubic hair
aldosterone (the missing hormone), is also prescribed.
appears, and the voice deepens long before normal
Infants and small children may also receive salt tablets,
puberty,sometimes as early as two to three years of age.
while older patients are told to eat salty foods. Medical
In the severe salt-wasting form of CAH,newborns therapy achieves hormonal balance most of the time,but
may develop symptoms shortly after birth, including CAH patients can have periods of fluctuating hormonal
vomiting,dehydration,electrolyte (a compound such as control that lead to increases in the dose of steroids pre-
sodium or calcium that separates to form ions when dis- scribed. Side effects of steroids include stunted growth.
solved in water) changes,and cardiac arrhythmia. Steroid therapy should not be suddenly stopped, since
adrenal insufficiency results.
In the mild form of CAH,which occurs in late child-
hood or early adulthood, symptoms include premature Patients with CAH should see a pediatric endocrinol-
development of pubic hair,irregular menstrual periods, ogist frequently. The endocrinologist will assess height,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 885
Congenital
adrenal
hyperplasia
Adrenal cortical hyperplasia.The adrenal on the right is nor-
mal,that on the left shows hyperplasia.(Photo Researchers,
Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
openings for surgical instruments. Adrenalectomy is fol-
KEY TERMS lowed by hormone therapy,but in lower doses than CAH
patients not treated surgically receive.
Adrenal glands—The two endocrine glands locat-
ed above the kidney that secrete hormones and Prognosis
epinephrine.
CAH can be controlled and successfully treated in
Aldosterone—A hormone secreted by the adrenal
most patients as long as they remain on drug therapy.
glands that is important for maintaining salt and
water balance in the body.
Prevention
Androgens—Steroid hormones that cause mas-
culinization. Prenatal therapy,in which a pregnant woman at risk
for a second CAH child is given dexamethasone to
Congenital—Present at birth.
decrease secretion of androgens by the adrenal glands of
Cortisol—A steroid hormone secreted by the the female fetus,has been in use for about 10 years. This
adrenal cortex that is important for maintenance of therapy is started in the first trimester when fetal adrenal
body fluids, electrolytes, and blood sugar levels. production of androgens begins,but before prenatal diag-
Hormone—A chemical messenger produced by nosis is done that would provide definitive information
the endocrine glands or certain other cells. Hor- about the sex of the fetus and its disease status. This
mones are usually carried in the blood stream and means that a number of fetuses are exposed to unneces-
regulate some metabolic activities. sary steroid treatment in order to prevent the develop-
ment of male-like genitals in female fetuses with CAH.
Steroids—Hormones, including aldosterone, cor-
Several hundred children have undergone this treatment
tisol, and androgens, derived from cholesterol that
with no major adverse effects,but its long-term risks are
share a four-ring structure.
unknown. Since there is very little data on the effective-
ness and safety of prenatal therapy, it should only be
offered to patients who clearly understand the risks and
benefits and who are capable of complying with strict
weight,and blood pressure,and order an annual x ray of
monitoring and follow-up throughout pregnancy and
the wrist (to assess bone age),as well as assess blood hor-
after the child is born.
mone levels. CAH patients with the milder form of the
Parents with a family history of CAH, including a
disorder are usually effectively treated with hydrocorti-
child who has CAH, should seek genetic counseling.
sone or prednisone,if they need medical treatment at all.
Genetic testing during pregnancy can provide informa-
Females with CAH who have masculine external tion on the risk of having a child with CAH.
genitalia require surgery to reconstruct the clitoris and/or
vagina. This is usually performed between the ages of
Resources
one and three.
BOOKS
An experimental type of drug therapy—a three-drug “Fetal Adrenal Development.”In Williams Obstetrics,20th ed.
combination, with an androgen blocking agent (flu- Stamford,CT:Appleton & Lange,1997.
tamide),an aromatase inhibitor (testolactone),and low “Fetal Treatment.”In Medical Genetics,ed. Lynn B. Jorde,et
al. St. Louis:Mosby,1995.
dose hydrocortisone—is currently being studied by
Hay Jr.,William W.,et al.,eds. Current Pediatric Diagnosis
physicians at the National Institutes of Health. Prelimi-
and Treatment.Stamford,CT:Appleton & Lange,1997.
nary results are encouraging,but it will be many years
before the safety and effectiveness of this therapy is PERIODICALS
fully known. Gussinye,Miquel,et al. “Bone Mineral Density in Prepubertal
and in Adolescent and Young Adult Patients with the Salt-
Adrenalectomy,a surgical procedure to remove the Wasting Form of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia.”Pedi-
adrenal glands,is a more radical treatment for CAH. It atrics100 (Oct. 1997):671.
was widely used before the advent of steroids. Today,it is
ORGANIZATIONS
recommended for CAH patients with little or no enzyme
American Academy of Pediatrics. 141 Northwest Point Boule-
activity and can be accomplished by laparoscopy. This is
vard,Elk Grove Village,IL 60007-1098. (847) 434-4000.
a minimally invasive type of surgery done through one or National Adrenal Diseases Foundation. 510 Northern Boule-
more small 1 in (2.5 cm) incisions and a laparoscope,an vard,Great Neck,NY 11021. (516) 487-4992. <http://
instrument with a fiber-optic light containing a tube with medhlp.netusa.net/www/nadf.htm>.
886 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aisalprepyh
lanerda
latinegnoC
OTHER limb from forming properly,if at all. It is estimated that
The Johns Hopkins Children’s Center. “Congenital Adrenal this amniotic band syndrome occurs in between one in
Hyperplasia Due to 21-Hydroxylase Deficiency.”<http:// 12,000 and one in 15,000 live births.
www.med.jhu.edu/pedendo/cha/printable.html>.
An infant with congenital amputation may be miss-
ing an entire limb or just a portion of a limb. Congenital
Jennifer Sisk
amputation resulting in the complete absence of a limb
beyond a certain point (and leaving a stump) is called
transverse deficiency or amelia. Longitudinal deficien-
cies occur when a specific part of a limb is missing; for
example,when the fibula bone in the lower leg is miss-
Congenital amputation
ing, but the rest of the leg is intact. Phocomelia is the
condition in which only a mid-portion of a limb is miss-
Definition
ing,as when the hands or feet are attached directly to
Congenital amputation is the absence of a fetal the trunk.
limb or fetal part at birth. This condition may be the
result of the constriction of fibrous bands within the
Diagnosis
membrane that surrounds the developing fetus (amniotic
band syndrome) or the exposure to substances known to Many cases of congenital amputation are not diag-
cause birth defects(teratogenic agents). Other factors, nosed until the baby is born. Ultrasound examinations
including genetics,may also play a role. may reveal the absence of a limb in some developing
fetuses,but routine ultrasounds may not pick up signs of
more subtle defects. However,if a doctor suspects that
Description
the fetus is at risk for developing a limb deficiency (for
An estimated one in 2,000 babies are born with all example,if the mother has been exposed to radiation),a
or part of a limb missing,ranging from a missing part of more detailed ultrasound examination may be performed.
a finger to the absence of both arms and both legs. Con-
genital amputation is the least common reason for
Treatment
amputation. However, there are occasional periods in
history where the number of congenital amputations Successful treatment of a child with congenital
increased. For example,the thalidomide tragedy of the amputation involves an entire medical team,including a
early 1960s occurred after pregnant mothers in western pediatrician,an orthopedist,a psychiatrist or psycholo-
Europe were given a tranquilizer containing the drug. gist, a prosthetist (an expert in making prosthetics, or
The result was a drastic increase in the number of babies artificial limbs),a social worker,and occupational and
born with deformed limbs. In this example, the birth physical therapists. The accepted method of treatment is
defect usually presented itself as very small,deformed to fit the child early with a functional prosthesis because
versions of normal limbs. More recently,birth defects as this leads to normal development and less wasting away
a result of radiation exposure near the site of the Cher- (atrophy) of the muscles of the limbs present. However,
nobyl disaster in Russia have left numerous children some parents and physicians believe that the child should
with malformed or absent limbs. be allowed to learn to play and perform tasks without a
prosthesis,if possible. When the child is older,he or she
can be involved in the decision of whether or not to be
Causes and symptoms
fitted for a prosthesis.
The exact cause of congenital amputations is
Recently,there have been cases in which physicians
unknown. However,according to the March of Dimes,
have detected amniotic band constriction interfering with
most birth defects have one or more genetic factors and
limb development fairly early in its course. In 1997,doc-
one or more environmental factors. It is also known that
tors at the Florida Institute for Fetal Diagnosis and Ther-
most birth defects occur in the first three months of preg-
apy reported two cases in which minimally invasive
nancy,when the organs of the fetus are forming. Within
surgery freed constricting amniotic bands and preserved
these crucial first weeks, frequently prior to when a
the affected limbs.
woman is aware of the pregnancy,the developing fetus is
most susceptible to substances that can cause birth
Alternative treatment
defects (teratogens). Exposure to teratogens can cause
congenital amputation. In other cases, tight amniotic Prevention of birth defects begins with building the
bands may constrict the developing fetus,preventing a well-being of the mother before pregnancy. Prenatal care
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 887
Congenital
amputation
KEY TERMS Congenital bladder anomalies
Definition
Prosthesis—An artificial replacement for a missing
part of the body. The two most common congenital bladder abnor-
malities are exstrophy and congenital diverticula. An
Teratogen—Any substance, agent, or process that
exstrophic bladder is one that is open to the outside and
interferes with normal prenatal development,
turned inside-out,so that its inside is visible at birth,pro-
causing the formation of one or more develop-
truding from the lower abdomen. A diverticulum is an
mental abnormalities of the fetus.
extension of a hollow organ,usually shaped like a pouch
with a narrow opening.
should be strong and educational so that the mother Description
understands both her genetic risks and her environmental
During fetal development,folds enclose tissues and
risks. Several disciplines in alternative therapy also rec-
organs and eventually fuse at the edges to form sealed
ommend various supplements and vitamins that may
compartments. Both in the front and the back, folds
reduce the chances of birth defects. If a surgical proce-
eventually become major body structures. In the back,
dure is planned,naturopathic and homeopathic pre- and
the entire spinal column folds in like a pipe wrapped in a
post-surgical therapies can speed recovery.
pillow. In the front, the entire lower urinary system is
folded in.
Prognosis
•Exstrophy of the bladder represents a failure of this
A congenital limb deficiency has a profound effect folding process to complete itself,so the organs form
on the life of the child and parents. However,occupation- with more or less of their front side missing and open to
al therapy can help the child learn to accomplish many the outside. At the same time, the front of the pelvic
tasks. In addition,some experts believe that early fitting bone is widely separated. The abdominal wall is open,
of a prosthesis will enhance acceptance of the prosthesis too. In fact,the defect often extends all the way to the
by the child and parents. penis in the male or splits the clitoris in the female.
•A congenital bladder diverticulum represent an area of
Prevention
weakness in the bladder wall through which extrudes
Studies have suggested that a multivitamin including some of the lining of the bladder. (A small balloon
folic acidmay reduce birth defects,including congenital squeezed in a fist will create diverticula-like effect
abnormalities. Smoking,drinking alcohol,and eating a between the fingers.) Bladder diverticula may be multi-
poor diet while pregnant may increase the risk of con- ple, and they often occur at the ureterovesical junc-
genital abnormalities. Daily,heavy exposure to chemi- tion—the entrance of the upper urinary system into the
cals may be dangerous while pregnant. bladder. In this location,they may cause urine to reflux
into the ureter and kidney,leading to infection and pos-
sible kidney damage.
Resources
BOOKS
Banasik,Jacquelyn L. “Genetic and Developmental Disor- Causes and symptoms
ders.”In Perspectives on Pathophysiology,ed. Lee-Ellen
As with many birth defects,the causes are not well
C. Copstead. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1994.
known. Lack of prenatal care and nutrition has been
ORGANIZATIONS linked to many birth defects; however,beyond the avoid-
International Child Amputee Network. <http://www.amp-info. ance of known teratogens (anything that can cause a birth
net/childamp.htm>. defect),there is little prevention possible. Exstrophy is
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275 Mamaroneck
rare,occurring in about one in 40,000 births. Diverticula
Ave.,White Plains,NY 10605. (914) 428-7100. <http://
are more common,but less serious.
www.modimes.org>.
If left untreated,the patient with bladder exstrophy
Jeffrey P. Larson,RPT will have no control over urination and is more likely to
develop bladder cancer. Diverticula, particularly if it
Congenital bladder diverticulum see
causes urine reflux,may lead to chronic infection and its
Congenital bladder anomalies subsequent consequences.
888 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
seilamona
reddalb
latinegnoC
Diagnosis
KEY TERMS
A major consideration with congenital abnormali-
ties is that they tend to be multiple. Further, each one
is unique in its extent and severity. Exstrophy can Congenital—Present at birth.
involve the rectum and large bowel and coexist with Cystoscopy—Examination of the urinary bladder
hernias. The obvious bladder exstrophy seen at birth with a thin telescope-like instrument.
will prompt immediate action and a search for other
Exstrophy—Being turned inside out combined
anomalies.
with being outside the body.
Diverticula are not visible and will be detected only
Diverticulum—A pouch extending from a hollow
if they cause trouble. They are usually found in an
organ.
examination for the cause of recurring urinary infec-
tions. X rays of the urinary system or a cystoscopy Radiologist—A physician who specializes in cre-
(examination with a telescope-like instrument) will ating images of the internal organs of the body.
identify them. Often, the two procedures are done Teratogen—Any agent that can cause birth defects.
together:a urologist will perform the cystoscopy,then a
Ureter—The tube that transports urine from the
radiologist will instill a contrast agent into the bladder
kidney to the bladder.
and take x rays.
Ureterovesical junction—The joining of the ureter
Treatment to the bladder.
Surgery is necessary and can usually produce suc- Urologist—A surgeon who specializes in diseases
cessful results. If possible, the surgery must be done of the urinary system.
within 48 hours of birth. Prior to surgery,the exposed
organs must be protected and all related defects identi-
fied and managed. Delay in the surgery leads to the
frequent need to divert the urine into the bowel Resources
because the partially repaired bladder cannot control
BOOKS
the flow. After surgery, the likelihood of infection
“Anomalies of the Bladder.”In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics,
requires monitoring.
ed. Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders
Co.,1996.
Alternative treatment Atala,Anthony,and Michael Keating. “Vesicoureteral Reflux
After surgery ongoing precautions to reduce fre- and Megaureter.”In Campbell’s Urology,ed. Patrick C.
Walsh,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1998.
quency of infection may need to be used. Cranberry
Gearhart,John P.,and Robert D. Jeffs. “Exstrophy-epispadias
juice has the ability to keep bacteria from adhering to
Complex and Bladder Anomalies.”In Campbell’s
the membranes and can help prevent infection when-
Urology,ed. Patrick C. Walsh,et al. Philadelphia:W. B.
ever there is increased risk. There are botanical and
Saunders Co.,1998.
homeopathic treatments available, however consulta-
“Vesicoureteral Reflux.”In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics,ed.
tion by a trained practitioner is recommended before Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
treatment.
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
Prognosis
With immediate surgery,three-quarters of patients
can be successfully repaired. They will have control of
their urine and no long-term consequences. The rate of Congenital brain defects
infection is greater for those with congenital bladder
anomalies,since any abnormality in the urinary system Definition
predisposes it to invasion by bacteria.
Congenital brain defects are a group of disorders of
brain development.
Prevention
Birth defects often have no precisely identified
Description
cause, therefore prevention is limited to general mea-
sures such as early and continuous prenatal care,appro- Brain development begins shortly after conception
priate nutrition,and a healthy lifestyle. and continues throughout the growth of a fetus. A com-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 889
Congenital
brain
defects
plex genetic program coordinates the formation,growth, The Dandy-Walker malformation is marked by
and migration of billions of neurons,or nerve cells,and incomplete formation,or absence of,the central section
their development into discrete, interacting brain of the cerebellum, and the growth of cysts within the
regions. Interruption of this program,especially early in lowest of the brain’s ventricles. The ventricles are fluid-
development,can cause structural defects in the brain. filled cavities within the brain, through which cere-
In addition, normal brain formation requires proper brospinal fluid (CSF) normally circulates. The cysts
development of the surrounding skull,and skull defects may block the exit of the fluid,causing hydrocephalus.
may lead to brain malformation. Congenital brain Symptoms may be present at birth or delayed until early
defects may be caused by inherited genetic defects, childhood.
spontaneous mutations within the genes of the embryo,
or effects on the embryo due to the mother’s infection, Soon after closure of the neural tube, the brain
trauma,or drug use. divides into two halves,or hemispheres. Failure of divi-
sion is termed holoprosencephaly (literally “whole
Early on in development, a flat strip of tissue forebrain”). Holoprosencephaly is almost always
along the back of the fetus rolls up to form a tube. This accompanied by facial and cranial deformities along the
so-called “neural tube”develops into the spinal cord, midline,including cleft lip,cleft palate,fused eye sock-
and at one end, the brain. Closure of the tube is ets and a single eye (cyclopia),and deformities of the
required for subsequent development of the tissue limbs, heart, gastrointestinal tract, and other internal
within. Anencephaly (literally “without brain”),results organs. Most infants are either stillborn or die soon
when the topmost portion of the tube fails to close. after birth. Survivors suffer from severe neurological
Anencephaly is the most common severe malformation impairments.
seen in stillborn births. It is about four times more
common in females than males. Anencephaly is some- The normal ridges and valleys of the mature brain
times seen to run in families,and for parents who have are formed after cells from the inside of the developing
conceived one anencephalic fetus,the risk of a second brain migrate to the outside and multiply. When these
is as high as 5%. Fewer than half of babies with anen- cells fail to migrate,the surface remains smooth,a con-
cephaly are born alive, and survival beyond the first dition called lissencephaly (“smooth brain”). Lissen-
month is rare. cephaly is often associated with facial abnormalities
including a small jaw,a high forehead,a short nose,and
Encephalocele is a protrusion of part of the brain low-set ears.
through a defect in the skull. The most common site for
encephalocele is along the front-to-back midline of the If damaged during growth, especially within the
skull,usually at the rear,although frontal encephaloceles first 20 weeks, brain tissue may stop growing, while
are more common among Asians. Pressure within the tissue around it continues to form. This causes an
skull pushes out cranial tissue. The protective layer over abnormal cleft or groove to appear on the surface of
the brain,the meninges,grows to cover the protrusion,as the brain, called schizencephaly (literally “split
does skin in some cases. Defects in skull closure are brain”). This cleft should not be confused with the nor-
thought to cause some cases of encephalocele, while mal wrinkled brain surface, nor should the name be
defects in neural tube closure may cause others. mistaken for schizophrenia,a mental disorder. Gener-
Encephaloceles may be small and contain little or no alized destruction of tissue or lack of brain develop-
brain tissue,or may be quite large and contain a signifi- ment may lead to hydranencephaly, in which cere-
cant fraction of the brain. brospinal fluid fills much of the space normally occu-
pied by the brain. Hydranencephaly is distinct from
Failure of neural-tube closure below the level of hydrocephalus, in which CSF accumulates within a
the brain prevents full development of the surrounding normally-formed brain,putting pressure on it and pos-
vertebral bones and leads to spina bifida,or a divided sibly causing skull expansion.
spinal column. Incomplete closure causes protrusion
of the spinal cord and meninges,called meningomye- Excessive brain size is termed megalencephaly (lit-
locele. Some cases of spina bifida are accompanied by erally “big brain”). Megalencephaly is defined as any
another defect at the base of the brain, known as the brain size above the 98th percentile within the popula-
Arnold-Chiari malformation or Chiari II malforma- tion. Some cases are familial, and may be entirely
tion. For reasons that are unclear, part of the cerebel- benign. Others are due to metabolic or neurologic dis-
lum is displaced downward into the spinal column. ease. The opposite condition, microcephaly, may be
Symptoms may be present at birth or delayed until caused by failure of the brain to develop,or by intrauter-
early childhood. ine infection,drug toxicity,or brain trauma.
890 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stcefed
niarb
latinegnoC
Causes and symptoms
KEY TERMS
Causes
Congenital brain defects may have genetic, infec- Amniocentesis—Removal of fluid from the sac
tious,toxic,or traumatic causes. In most cases,no certain surrounding a fetus for purposes of diagnosis.
cause can be identified.
Cerebrospinal fluid—Fluid produced within the
GENETIC CAUSES. Some brain defects are caused by brain for nutrient transport and structural purposes.
trisomy,the inclusion of a third copy of a chromosome CSF circulates through the ventricles, open spaces
normally occurring in pairs. Most trisomies occur within the brain, and drains through the mem-
because of improper division of the chromosomes during branes surrounding the brain.
formation of eggs or sperm. Trisomy of chromosome 9
Congenital—Defect present at birth.
can cause some cases of Dandy-Walker and Chiari II
Fetus—The unborn human, developing in a
malformation. Some cases of holoprosencephaly are
woman’s uterus, from the eighth week after fertil-
caused by trisomy of chromosome 13,while others are
ization to birth.
due to abnormalities in chromosomes 7 or 18. Individual
gene defects,either inherited or spontaneous,are respon-
sible for other cases of congenital brain malformations.
DRUGS. Drugs known to cause congenital brain •megalencephaly due to neurological or metabolic dis-
defects when used by the mother during critical develop-
ease:mental retardation,seizures.
mental periods include:
•anticonvulsant drugs
Diagnosis
•retinoic acid and tretinoin
Congenital brain defects are diagnosed either from
•warfarin
direct physical examinationor imaging studies including
•alcohol
computed tomography scans(CT) and magnetic reso-
•cocaine nance imaging(MRI) scans. Electroencephalography
(EEG) may be used to reveal characteristic abnormalities.
OTHER. Other causes of congenital brain defects
include: Prenatal diagnosis of neural tube defects causing
anencephaly or meningomyelocele is possible through
•intrauterine infections, including cytomegalovirus,
ultrasound examination and maternal blood testing for
rubella,herpes simplex,and varicella zoster
alpha-fetoprotein, which is almost always elevated.
•maternal diabetes mellitus Ultrasound can also be used to diagnose Dandy-Walker
•maternal phenylketonuria and Chiari II malformations. Amniocentesismay reveal
trisomies or other chromosomal abnormalities.
•fetal trauma
Symptoms Treatment
Besides the features listed above,symptoms of con-
Meningomyelocele may be treated with surgery to
genital brain defects may include:
close the open portion of the spinal cord. Surgery for
•Chiari II malformation:impaired swallowing and gag encephalocele is possible only if there is a minimal
reflex, loss of the breathing reflex, facial paralysis, amount of brain tissue protruding. Malformations associ-
uncontrolled eye movements (nystagmus), impaired ated with hydrocephalus (Dandy-Walker,Chiari II,and
balance and gait. some cases of hydranencephaly) may be treated by
installation of a drainage shunt for cerebrospinal fluid.
•Dandy-Walker malformation: symptoms of hydro-
Drugs may be used to treat some symptoms of brain
cephalus,lack of muscle tone or “floppiness,”seizures,
defects,including seizures and spasticity.
spasticity, deafness, irritability, visual impairment,
deterioration of consciousness,paralysis.
•Lissencephaly:lack of muscle tone,seizures,develop- Prognosis
mental delay,spasticity,cerebral palsy.
Most congenital brain defects carry a very poor prog-
•Hydranencephaly:irritability,spasticity,seizures,tem- nosis. Surgical treatment of meningomyelocele and
perature oscillations. encephalocele may be successful,with lasting neurologi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 891
Congenital
brain
defects
cal deficiencies that vary in severity. Early treatment of allows the femoral head to ride upward out of the joint
hydrocephalus may prevent more severe brain damage. socket,especially when weight bearing begins.
Causes and symptoms
Prevention
Clinical studies show a familial tendency toward hip
Some cases of congenital brain defects can be pre-
dysplasia,with more females affected than males. This
vented with good maternal nutrition, including folic
disorder is found in many cultures around the world.
acidsupplements. Folic acid is a vitamin that has been
However,statistics show that the Native American popu-
shown to reduce the incidence of neural tube defects.
lation has a high incidence of hip dislocation. This has
Pregnant women should avoid exposure to infection,
been documented to be due to the common practice of
especially during the first trimester. Abstention from
swaddling and using cradleboards for restraining the
drugs and alcohol during pregnancy may reduce risk.
infants. This places the infant’s hips into extreme adduc-
Genetic counseling is advisable for parents who have
tion (brought together). The incidence of congenital hip
had one child with anencephaly,since the likelihood of
dysplasia is also higher in infants born by caesarian and
having another is increased.
breech position births. Evidence also shows a greater
chance of this hip abnormality in the first born compared
Resources to the second or third child. Hormonal changes within the
mother during pregnancy,resulting in increased ligament
BOOKS
laxity, is thought to possibly cross over to the placenta
Bradley,W. G.,et al. Neurology in Clinical Practice.2nd ed.
and cause the baby to have lax ligaments while still in the
Butterworth-Heinemann,1996.
womb. Other symptoms of complete dislocation include a
Fenichel,G. M. Clinical Pediatric Neurology.3rd ed. W. B.
Saunders Co.,1997. shortening of the leg and limited ability to abduct the leg.
Norman,M. G.,et al. Congenital Malformations of the Brain.
Oxford University Press,1995.
Diagnosis
Richard Robinson Because the abnormalities of this hip problem often
vary,a thorough physical examinationis necessary for
Congenital defects see Birth defects an accurate diagnosis of congenital hip dysplasia. The
hip disorder can be diagnosed by moving the hip to
determine if the head of the femur is moving in and out
of the hip joint. One specific method,called the Ortolani
test,begins with each of the examiners’hands around the
infant’s knees,with the second and third fingers pointing
Congenital hip dysplasia down the child’s thigh. With the legs abducted (moved
apart), the examiner may be able to discern a distinct
Definition clicking sound with motion. If symptoms are present
with a noted increase in abduction,the test is considered
A condition of abnormal development of the hip,
positive for hip joint instability. It is important to note
resulting in hip joint instability and potential dislocation
this test is only valid a few weeks after birth.
of the thigh bone from the socket in the pelvis. This con-
dition has been more recently termed developmental hip The Barlow method is another test performed with the
dysplasia,as it often develops over the first few weeks, infant’s hip brought together with knees in full bent posi-
months,or years of life. tion. The examiner’s middle finger is placed over the out-
side of the hipbone while the thumb is placed on the inner
side of the knee. The hip is abducted to where it can be felt
Description if the hip is sliding out and then back in the joint. In older
babies,if there is a lack of range of motion in one hip or
Congenital hip dysplasia is a disorder in children
even both hips,it is possible that the movement is blocked
that is either present at birth or shortly thereafter. During
because the hip has dislocated and the muscles have con-
gestation,the infant’s hip should be developing with the
tracted in that position. Also in older infants,hip disloca-
head of the thigh bone (femur) sitting perfectly centered
tion is evident if one leg looks shorter than the other.
in its shallow socket (acetabulum). The acetabulum
should cover the head of the femur as if it were a ball sit- X-ray films can be helpful in detecting abnormal find-
ting inside of a cup. In the event of congenital hip dyspla- ings of the hip joint. X rays may also be helpful in finding
sia, the development of the acetabulum in an infant the proper positioning of the hip joint for treatments of
892 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aisalpsyd
pih
latinegnoC
casting. Ultrasound has been noted as a safe and effective
tool for the diagnosis of congenital hip dysplasia. Ultra- KEY TERMS
sound has advantages over x rays,as several positions are
noted during the ultrasound procedure. This is in contrast Acetabulum—The large cup-shaped cavity at the
to only one position observed during the x ray. junction of pelvis and femur or thigh bone.
Orthosis—A force system designed to control or
Treatment correct or compensate for a bone deformity,
The objective of treatment is to replace the head of the deforming forces, or forces absent from the body.
femur into the acetabulum and,by applying constant pres-
sure,to enlarge and deepen the socket. In the past,stabi-
lization was achieved by placing rolled cotton diapers or a
pillow between the thighs,thereby keeping the knees in a helpful in preparing for possible breech births associated
frog like position. More recently,the Pavlik harness and with hip problems. Avoiding excessive and prolonged
von Rosen splint are commonly used in infants up to the infant hip adduction may help prevent strain on the hip
age of six months. A stiff shell cast may be used,which joints. Early diagnosis remains an important part of pre-
achieves the same purpose,spreading the legs apart and vention of congenital hip dysplasia.
forcing the head of the femur into the acetabulum. In some
cases,in older children between six to 18 months,surgery
Resources
may be necessary to reposition the joint. Also at this age,
the use of closed manipulation may be applied successful- BOOKS
ly, by moving the leg around manually to replace joint. Chandrasoma,Parakrama,and Clive R. Taylor. Concise Pathol-
ogy.East Norwalk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1991.
Operations are not only performed to reduce the disloca-
tion of the hip,but also to repair a defect in the acetabu-
PERIODICALS
lum. A cast is applied after the operation to hold the head Feeney,Tracy. “Early Intervention:Key to Success in Treat-
of the femur in the correct position. The use of a home ment of Infants with Hip Dysplasia.”Advance For Physi-
tractionprogram is now more common. However,after cal Therapy(Nov. 1995).
the age of eight years,surgical procedures are primarily Jamali,Mohammed and Kymberly McCoy. “Developmental
done for painreduction measures only. Total hip surgeries Dysplasia of the Hip.”Advance For Physical Therapy8,
may be inevitable later in adulthood. no. 18 (May 1998).
ORGANIZATIONS
Alternative treatment March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275 Mamaroneck
Ave.,White Plains,NY 10605. (914) 428-7100. <http://
Nonsurgical treatments include exerciseprograms,
www.modimes.org>.
orthosis (a force system, often involving braces), and
medications. A physical therapist may develop a program
Jeffrey P. Larson,RPT
that includes strengthening,range-of-motion exercises,
pain control, and functional activities. Chiropractic
medicine may be helpful, especially the procedures of
closed manipulations,to reduce the dislocated hip joint.
Congenital lobar emphysema
Prognosis
Unless corrected soon after birth,abnormal stresses Definition
cause malformation of the developing femur,with a char-
Congenital lobar emphysema is a chronic disease
acteristic limp or waddling gait. If cases of congenital
that causes respiratory distress in infants.
hip dysplasia go untreated,the child will have difficulty
walking,which could result in life-long pain. In addition,
if this condition goes untreated,the abnormal hip posi- Description
tioning will force the acetabulum to locate to another
Congenital lobar emphysema,also called infantile
position to accommodate the displaced femur.
lobar emphysema,is a respiratory disease that occurs in
infants when air enters the lungs but cannot leave easily.
Prevention
The lungs become over-inflated, causing respiratory
Prevention includes proper prenatal care to deter- function to decrease and air to leak out into the space
mine the position of the baby in the womb. This may be around the lungs.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 893
Congenital
lobar
emphysema
strengthening the patient’s respiratory function. Vitamin
KEY TERMS and mineral supplementation may be recommended as
may herbal remedies such as lobelia (Lobelia inflata)
Congenital—A disease or condition that is present that strengthen the lungs and enhance their elasticity.
at birth. Homeopathic constitutional care may also be beneficial
for this condition.
Emphysema—A condition in which the air sacs in
the lungs become overinflated, causing a decrease
in respiratory function. Prognosis
Lobar—Relating to a lobe, a rounded projecting Surgery for congenital lobar emphysema has excel-
part of the lungs. lent results.
Prevention
Half of the cases of congenital lobar emphysema Congenital lobar emphysema cannot be prevented.
occur in the first four weeks of life,and three-quarters
occur in infants less than six months old. Congenital
Resources
lobar emphysema is more common in boys than in girls.
BOOKS
Each person has two lungs,right and left. The right
Baum,Gerald L.,et al.,eds. Textbook of Pulmonary Diseases.
lung is divided into three sections,called lobes,and the
Philadelphia:Lippincott-Raven,1998.
left lung into two lobes. Congenital lobar emphysema
usually affects only one lobe,and this is usually an upper ORGANIZATIONS
American Lung Association. 1740 Broadway,New York,NY
lobe. It occurs most frequently in the left upper lobe,fol-
10019. (800) 586-4872. <http://www.lungusa.org>.
lowed by the right middle lobe.
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
Causes and symptoms www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
The cause of congenital lobar emphysema often can- National Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Med-
icine. 1400 Jackson St.,Denver,CO 80206. (800) 222-
not be identified. The airway may be obstructed or the
5864. <http://www.nationaljewish.org/main.html>.
infant’s lungs may not have developed properly. Congen-
ital lobar emphysema is almost never of genetic origin.
Lori De Milto
Symptoms of congenital lobar emphysema include:
•shortness of breath Congenital megacolon see Hirschsprung’s
•wheezing disease
•lips and fingernail beds that have a bluish tinge Congenital thymic hypoplasia see DiGeorge
syndrome
Diagnosis
Congenital lobar emphysema is usually identified
within the first two weeks of the infant’s life. It is diag-
nosed by respiratory symptoms and a chest x ray,which
shows the over-inflation of the affected lobe and may
Congenital ureter anomalies
show a blocked air passage.
Definition
Treatment
The ureter drains urine from the kidney into the
For infants with no,mild,or intermittent symptoms,
bladder. It is not simply a tube but an active organ that
no treatment is necessary. For more serious cases of con-
propels urine forward by muscular action. It has a valve
genital lobar emphysema,surgery is necessary,usually a
at its bottom end that prevents urine from flowing back-
lobectomy to remove the affected lung lobe.
ward into the kidney. Normally, there is one ureter on
each side of the body for each kidney. However,among
Alternative treatment
the many abnormalities of ureteral development,duplica-
Alternative treatments that may be helpful for con- tion is quite common. Ureters may also be malformed in
genital lobar emphysema are aimed at supporting and a variety of ways—some harmful,others not.
894 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
seilamona
reteru
latinegnoC
Description
KEY TERMS
The urogenital system, for some reason, is more
likely than any other to have birth defects,and they can
Congenital—Present at birth.
occur in endless variety. Ureters can be duplicated com-
pletely or partially,they can be in the wrong place,they Contrast agent—A chemical or other substance
can be deformed,and they can end in the wrong place. placed in the body to show structures that would
The trouble these abnormalities bring is directly related not otherwise be visible on x ray or other imaging
to their effect on the flow of urine. As long as urine flows studies.
normally through them, and only in one direction, no Cystoscopy—Looking into the urinary bladder
harm is done. with a thin telescope-like instrument.
Ectopic—Out of place.
•Duplication of ureters is quite common,either in part or
completely. Kidneys are sometimes duplicated as well. Septicemia—A serious whole body infection
Someone may have four kidneys and four ureters or two spreading through the blood stream.
kidneys,half of each drained by a separate ureter,or a sin- Uretreovesical valve—A sphincter (an opening
gle kidney with two,three,or four ureters attached. As controlled by a circular muscle), located where
long as urine can flow easily in the correct direction,such the ureter enters the bladder, that keeps urine from
malformations may never be detected. If,however,one of flowing backward toward the kidney.
the ureters has a dead end,a stricture or stenosis (narrow- Urogenital—Both the urinary system and the sex-
ing),or a leaky ureterovesical valve (valve between the ual organs, which form together in the developing
ureter and bladder),infection is the likely result. embryo.
•Stricture or stenosis of a ureter prevents urine from
flowing freely. Whenever flow is obstructed in the
body—urine,bile,mucus,or any other liquid—infec-
Practically the only symptom generated by ureteral
tion follows. Ureters can be obstructed anywhere along
abnormalities is urinary tract infection. A lower tract
their course,though the ureterovesical valve is the most
infection—in the bladder—is called cystitis. In children,
common place.
it may cause feverand systemic symptoms,but in adults
•A ureter may have an ectopic (out of place) orifice
it causes only cloudy,burning,and frequent urine. Upper
(opening)—it may enter the bladder, or even another
tract infections,on the other hand,can be serious for both
structure,where it does not belong and therefore with-
adults and children, causing high fevers, back pain,
out an adequate valve to control reflux.
severe generalized discomfort,and even leading to kid-
•The primary ureter,or a duplicate,may not even reach ney failure or septicemia (infection spreading throughout
the bladder,but rather terminate in a dead end. Urine the body by way of the blood stream).
will stagnate there and eventually cause infection. In rare cases,urine from an ectopic ureter will bypass
•A ureter can be perfectly normal but in the wrong place, the bladder and dribble out of the bottom somewhere,
such as behind the vena cava (the large vein in the mid- through a natural orifice like the vagina or a completely
dle of the abdomen). A so-called retrocaval ureter may separate unnatural opening.
be pinched by the vena cava so that flow is hindered.
Other aberrant locations may also lead to compression Diagnosis
and impaired flow. Serious or recurrent urinary infections will prompt a
Besides infection,urine that backs up will cause the
search for underlying abnormalities. Cystoscopy(look-
ing into the bladder with a thin telescope-like instrument)
ureter and the kidney to dilate. Eventually, the kidney
and x rays with a contrast agent to illuminate the urinary
will stop functioning because of the back pressure. This
condition is called hydronephrosis—a kidney swollen system will usually identify the defect. Computed
with urine. tomography scans (CT) and magnetic resonance
imaging(MRI) scans may provide additional informa-
tion. Urine cultures to identify the infecting germs will
Causes and symptoms be repeated frequently until the problem is corrected.
The causes of birth defects are multiple and often
unknown. Furthermore, the precise cause of specific Treatment
birth defects has only rarely been identified. Such is the Sometimes the recurring infections caused by flow
case with congenital ureteral anomalies. abnormalities can be treated with repeated and changing
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 895
Congenital
ureter
anomalies
courses of antibiotics. Over time, the infecting germs form of cardiomyopathy. In congestive cardiomyopathy,
develop resistance to most treatments, especially the also called dilated cardiomyopathy,the walls of the heart
safer ones. If it can be done with acceptable risk,it is bet- chambers stretch (dilate) to hold a greater volume of
ter to repair the defect surgically. Urologists have an blood than normal. Congestive cardiomyopathy is the
arsenal of approaches to urine drainage that range from final stage of many heart diseases and the most common
simply reimplanting a ureter into the bladder,in such a condition resulting in congestive heart failure.
way that an effective valve is created,to building a new
bladder out of a piece of bowel.
Description
About 50,000 Americans develop cardiomyopathy
Alternative treatment
each year. Of those,87% have congestive cardiomyopa-
There are botanical and homeopathic treatments thy. Primary cardiomyopathy accounts for only 1% of all
available for urinary tract infection. None can take the deaths from heart disease.
place of correcting a problem that is occurring because of
When the heart muscle is damaged by a disease
a malformed or dysfunctional organ system. Once cor-
process,it cannot pump enough blood to meet the body’s
rection of the cause is addressed and there is unimpeded
needs. Uninjured areas of the walls of the two lower heart
flow of urine,adequate fluid intake can contribute to pre-
chambers (called ventricles) stretch to make up for the
vention of future infections.
lost pumping action. At first,the enlarged chambers allow
more blood to be pumped with less force. The stretched
Prognosis muscle can also contract more forcefully. Over time,the
heart muscle continues to stretch, ultimately becoming
As long as damage to the kidneys from infection or
weaker. The heart is forced to work harder to pump blood
back pressure has not become significant, the surgical
by beating faster. Eventually it cannot keep up,and blood
repair of troublesome ureteral defects produces excellent
backs up into the veins,legs,and lungs. When this hap-
long-term results in the great majority of cases. Monitor-
pens,the condition is called congestive heart failure.
ing for recurrent infections is always a good idea, and
occasional checking of kidney function will detect hid- Congestive cardiomyopathy usually affects both
den ongoing damage. ventricles. Blood backed up into the lungs from the left
ventricle causes fluid to congest the lung tissue. This is
called pulmonary edema. When the right ventricle fails
Resources
to pump enough blood, blood backs up into the veins
BOOKS
causing edemain the legs,feet,ankles,and abdomen.
Bauer,Stuart B. “Anomalies of the Kidney and Ureteropelvic
Junction.”In Campbell’s Urology,ed. Patrick C. Walsh,et
al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1998. Causes and symptoms
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997. Congestive cardiomyopathy may be caused by a
“Vesicoureteral Reflux.”In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics,ed. number of conditions. Cardiomyopathy with a known
Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co., cause is called secondary cardiomyopathy. When no
1996. cause can be identified,it is called primary cardiomyopa-
Schlussel,Richard N.,and Alan B. Retik. “Anomalies of the thy or idiopathic cardiomyopathy. About 80% of all cases
Ureter.”In Campbell’s Urology,ed. Patrick C. Walsh,et of cardiomyopathy do not have a known cause. Many
al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1998.
heart specialists think that many cases of idiopathic con-
gestive cardiomyopathy may be caused by a viral infec-
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
tion. Because cardiomyopathy may occur many years
after a viral infection and viruses sometimes go undetect-
ed in laboratory tests,it is difficult to know if a virus is the
cause. Some people have a weak heart from advanced
coronary artery diseasethat causes heart muscle dam-
Congestive cardiomyopathy age. This is sometimes called ischemic cardiomyopathy.
Conditions that can cause congestive cardiomyopa-
Definition
thy are:
Cardiomyopathy is an ongoing disease process that
•Coronary artery disease
damages the muscle wall of the lower chambers of the
heart. Congestive cardiomyopathy is the most common •Infections
896 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yhtapoymoidrac
evitsegnoC
KEY TERMS
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor—A Diuretic—A type of drug that helps the kidneys
drug that relaxes blood vessel walls and lowers eliminate excess salt and water.
blood pressure.
Edema—Swelling caused by fluid buildup in tis-
Atherosclerosis—Buildup of a fatty substance sues.
called a plaque inside blood vessels.
Granulomatous myocarditis—Also called giant cell
Cardiac catheterization—A diagnostic test for eval- myocarditis, this noninfectious inflammation of the
uating heart disease; a catheter is inserted into an heart causes large areas of tissue death in the heart
artery and passed into the heart. muscle, ventricular enlargement, and clots inside
the heart chambers.
Cardiomyopathy—Disease of the heart muscle.
Idiopathic cardiomyopathy—Cardiomyopathy
Congestive cardiomyopathy—Also called dilated
without a known cause.
cardiomyopathy; cardiomyopathy in which the
walls of the heart chambers stretch, enlarging the Sarcoidosis—A chronic disease that causes forma-
heart ventricles so they can hold a greater volume tion of abnormal areas containing inflammatory
of blood than normal. cells, called granulomas, in any organ or tissue; in
the heart, large areas of the heart muscle can be
Coxsackievirus B—A type of virus in the group
involved, causing cardiomyopathy.
Enterovirus that causes an infection similar to polio,
but without paralysis. Vasodilator—Any drug that relaxes blood vessel
walls.
Digitalis—A drug that helps the heart muscle to
have stronger pumping action. Ventricle—One of the two lower chambers of the
heart.
Dilated cardiomyopathy—Also called congestive
cardiomyopathy; cardiomyopathy in which the Wegener’s granulomatosis—A disease usually
walls of the heart chambers stretch, enlarging the affecting males that causes the infiltration of inflam-
heart ventricles so they can hold a greater volume matory cells and tissue death in the lungs, kidneys,
of blood than normal. blood vessels, heart, and other tissues.
•noninfectious inflammatory conditions B is the most common cause of viral congestive car-
diomyopathy.
•alcohol and other drugs or toxins
Myocarditis can also be caused by noninfectious
•hypertension
disorders. For example,the conditions sarcoidosis,gran-
•nutritional and metabolic disorders ulomatous myocarditis,and Wegener’s granulomatosis
cause inflammation and tissue deathin the heart muscle.
•pregnancy.
Years of drinking excessive amounts of alcohol can
Coronary artery disease is one of the most common
weaken the heart muscle,leading to congestive cardiomy-
causes of congestive cardiomyopathy. In coronary artery
opathy. Other drugs and toxins,such as cocaine,pesti-
disease,the arteries supplying blood to the heart become
cides,and other chemicals,may have the same effect.
narrowed or blocked. When blood flow to an area of the
heart is completely blocked, the person has a heart High blood pressure (hypertension) puts extra pres-
attack. The heart muscle suffers damage when its blood sure on blood vessels and the heart. This increased pres-
supply is reduced or blocked. Significant recurrent mus- sure makes the heart work harder to pump blood,which
cle damage can occur silently. This damage can lead to may thicken and damage the chamber walls.
congestive cardiomyopathy. Severe nutritional deficiencies can weaken the heart
muscle and affect its pumping ability. Certain disorders
Infections caused by bacteria, viruses, and other
of metabolism,including diabetes mellitusand thyroid
microorganisms can involve the heart,causing inflamma-
disorders,can also lead to congestive cardiomyopathy.
tion of the heart muscle (myocarditis). The inflamma-
tion may damage the heart muscle and cause congestive Occasionally,inflammation of the heart muscle and
cardiomyopathy. In the United States,the coxsackievirus congestive cardiomyopathy may develop late in pregnan-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 897
Congestive
cardiomyopathy
cy or shortly after a woman gives birth. This type of con- into an artery and passed into the heart. It is used to mea-
gestive cardiomyopathy is called peripartum cardiomy- sure pressure in the heart and the amount of blood
opathy. The cause of congestive cardiomyopathy in preg- pumped by the heart. A small tissue sample of the heart
nancy is not known. muscle can be removed through the catheter for examina-
tion under a microscope (biopsy). This biopsy can show
Congestive cardiomyopathy usually is a chronic
the type and amount of damage to the heart muscle.
condition,developing gradually over time. Patients with
early congestive cardiomyopathy may not have symp-
toms. The most common symptoms are fatigue and Treatment
shortness of breathon exertion. Unfortunately,sudden
cardiac deathis not uncommon with this condition. It When a patient is diagnosed with congestive car-
stems from irregular heart rhythms in the ventricles (ven- diomyopathy, physicians try to find out the cause. If
tricular arrhythmias). coronary artery disease is not the culprit,in most other
cases a cause is not identified. When a condition respon-
Patients with more advanced congestive cardiomy-
sible for the congestive cardiomyopathy is diagnosed,
opathy may also have chest or abdominal pains,extreme
treatment is aimed at correcting the underlying condi-
tiredness,dizziness,and swelling of the legs and ankles.
tion. Congestive cardiomyopathy caused by drinking
excess alcohol or by drugs or toxins can be treated by
Diagnosis eliminating the alcohol or toxin completely. In some
cases,the heart may recover after the toxic substance is
Diagnosis of congestive cardiomyopathy is based on:
removed from the body. Bacterial myocarditis is treated
•symptoms with an antibiotic to eliminate the bacteria.
•medical history There is no cure for idiopathic congestive cardiomy-
opathy. Medicines are given to reduce the workload of
•physical examination
the heart and to relieve the symptoms.
•chest x ray
One or more of the following types of medicines
•electrocardiogram (ECG; also called EKG)
may be prescribed for congestive cardiomyopathy:
•echocardiogram
•digitalis
•cardiac catheterization
•diuretics
The diagnosis is based on the patient’s symptoms,a
•vasodilators
complete physical examination, and tests that detect
abnormalities of the heart chambers. The physician lis- •beta blockers
tens to the heart with a stethoscope to detect abnormal
•angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE inhib-
heart rhythms and heart sounds. A heart murmur might
itors)
mean that the heart valves are not closing properly due to
•angiotensin receptor blockers
the ventricles being enlarged.
Digitalis helps the heart muscle to have stronger
A chest x ray can show if the heart is enlarged and if
pumping action. Diuretics help eliminate excess salt and
there is fluid in the lungs. Abnormalities of heart valves
water from the kidneys by making patients urinate more
and other structures may also be seen on a chest x ray.
often. This helps reduce the swelling caused by fluid
An electrocardiogram provides a record of electrical
buildup in the tissues. Vasodilators, beta blockers, and
changes in the heart muscle during the heartbeat. It gives
ACE inhibitors lower blood pressure and expand the
information on the heart rhythm and can show if the
blood vessels so blood can move more easily through
heart chamber is enlarged. An ECG can detect damage to
them. This action makes it easier for the heart to pump
the heart muscle and the amount of damage.
blood through the vessels.
Echocardiography uses sound waves to make
Patients may also be given anticoagulant medica-
images of the heart. These images can show if the heart
tions to prevent clots from forming due to pooling of
wall or chambers are enlarged and if there are any abnor-
blood in the heart chambers. Medicines to prevent abnor-
malities of the heart valves. Echocardiography can also
mal heart rhythms (arrhythmias) may be given,but some
evaluate the pumping efficiency of the ventricles.
of these drugs can also reduce the force of heart contrac-
Cardiac catheterization usually is only used if a tions. Automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillators
diagnosis cannot be made with other methods. In cardiac (AICDs) can treat life-threatening arrhythmias, which
catheterization,a small tube (called a catheter) is inserted are relatively common in severe cardiomyopathy.
898 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yhtapoymoidrac
evitsegnoC
Certain lifestyle changes may help reduce the work- National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
load on the heart and relieve symptoms. Some patients Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
may need to change their diet, stop drinking alcohol, www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
begin a physician-supervised exerciseprogram,and/or Texas Heart Institute. Heart Information Service. P.O. Box 20345,
Houston,TX 77225-0345. <http://www.tmc.edu/thi>.
stop smoking.
Severe congestive cardiomyopathy usually causes
Toni Rizzo
heart failure. When the heart muscle is damaged so
severely that medicines cannot help, a heart transplant Congestive heart failure see Heart failure
may be the only remaining treatment to be considered.
Prognosis
The outlook for a patient with congestive cardiomy-
opathy depends on the severity of the disease and the Congenital heart disease
person’s health. Generally,congestive cardiomyopathy
Definition
worsens over time and the prognosis is not good. About
50% of patients with congestive cardiomyopathy live for Congenital heart disease, also called congenital
five years after the diagnosis. Twenty five percent of heart defect,includes a variety of malformations of the
patients are alive 10 years after diagnosis. Women with heart or its major blood vessels that are present at birth.
congestive cardiomyopathy live twice as long as men
with the disease. Many of the deaths are caused by sud- Description
den abnormal heart rhythms.
Congenital heart disease occurs when the heart or
blood vessels near the heart do not develop properly
Prevention before birth. Some infants are born with mild types of
congenital heart disease,but most need surgery in order
Because idiopathic congestive cardiomyopathy does
to survive. Patients who have had surgery are likely to
not have a known cause,there is no sure way to prevent
experience other cardiac problems later in life.
it. The best way to prevent congestive cardiomyopathy is
to avoid known causes such as drinking excess alcohol or Most types of congenital heart disease obstruct the
taking toxic drugs. Eating a nutritious diet and getting flow of blood in the heart or the nearby vessels,or cause
regular exercise to improve overall fitness also can help an abnormal flow of blood through the heart. Rarer types
the heart to stay healthy. of congenital heart disease occur when the newborn has
only one ventricle,or when the pulmonary artery and the
Congestive cardiomyopathy may also be prevented by
aorta come out of the same ventricle,or when one side of
identifying and treating any conditions that might damage
the heart is not completely formed.
the heart muscle. These include high blood pressure and
coronary artery disease. Regular blood pressure checks
Patent ductus arteriosus
and obtaining immediate medical care for hypertension
and symptoms of coronary artery disease,such as chest
Patent ductus arteriosusrefers to the opening of a
pain,are important to keep the heart functioning properly.
passageway—or temporary blood vessel (ductus)—to
Finally, diagnosing and treating congestive car- carry the blood from the heart to the aorta before birth,
diomyopathy before the heart becomes severely damaged allowing blood to bypass the lungs, which are not yet
may improve the outlook. functional. The ductus should close spontaneously in the
first few hours or days after birth. When it does not close
in the newborn, some of the blood that should flow
Resources
through the aorta then returns to the lungs. Patent ductus
BOOKS
arteriosus is common in premature babies, but rare in
Bellenir,Karen,and Peter D. Dresser,eds. Cardiovascular Dis-
full-term babies. It has also been associated with mothers
eases and Disorders Sourcebook.Detroit:Omnigraphics,
who had German measles(rubella) while pregnant.
1995.
Texas Heart Institute. Heart Owner’s Handbook.New York:
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
John Wiley and Sons,1996.
ORGANIZATIONS Hypoplastic left heart syndrome, a condition in
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX which the left side of the heart is underdeveloped,is rare,
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>. but it is the most serious type of congenital heart disease.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 899
Congenital
heart
disease
With this syndrome, blood reaches the aorta, which congenital heart disease in the United States are tetralogy
pumps blood to the entire body, only from the ductus, of Fallot,which includes four defects. The major defects
which then normally closes within a few days of birth. In are a large hole between the ventricles, which allows
hypoplastic left heart syndrome,the baby seems normal oxygen-poor blood to mix with oxygen-rich blood,and
at birth,but as the ductus closes,blood cannot reach the narrowing at or beneath the pulmonary valve. The other
aorta and circulation fails. defects are an overly muscular right ventricle and an
aorta that lies over the ventricular hole.
Obstruction defects In transposition (reversal of position) of the great
arteries,the pulmonary artery and the aorta are reversed,
When heart valves,arteries,or veins are narrowed,
causing oxygen-rich blood to re-circulate to the lungs
they partly or completely block the flow of blood. The
while oxygen-poor blood goes to the rest of the body. In
most common obstruction defects are pulmonary valve
tricuspid atresia, the baby lacks a triscupid valve and
stenosis,aortic valve stenosis,and coarctation of the
blood cannot flow properly from the right atrium to the
aorta. Bicuspid aortic valve and subaortic stenosis are
right ventricle.
less common.
Stenosis is a narrowing of the valves or arteries. In Other defects
pulmonary stenosis,the pulmonary valve does not open
Ebstein’s anomaly is a rare congenital syndrome that
properly, forcing the right ventricle to work harder. In
causes malformed tricuspid valve leaflets,which allow
aortic stenosis,the improperly formed aortic valve is nar-
blood to leak between the right ventricle and the right
rowed. As the left ventricle works harder to pump blood
atrium. It also may cause a hole in the wall between the
through the body,it becomes enlarged. In coarctation of
left and right atrium. Treatment often involves repairing
the aorta,the aorta is constricted,reducing the flow of
the tricuspid valve. Ebstein’s anomaly may be associated
blood to the lower part of the body and increasing blood
with maternal use of the psychiatric drug lithium during
pressure in the upper body.
pregnancy.
A bicuspid aortic valve has only two flaps instead
Brugada syndrome is another rare congenital heart
of three, which can lead to stenosis in adulthood.
defect that appears in adulthood and may cause sudden
Subaortic stenosis is a narrowing of the left ventricle
death if untreated. Symptoms, which include rapid,
below the aortic valve,that limits the flow of blood from
uneven heart beat,often appear at night. Scientists believe
the left ventricle.
that Brugada syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene
SCN5A,which involves cardiac sodium channels.
Septal defects
Infants born with DiGeorge sequence can have heart
When a baby is born with a hole in the septum (the defects such as a malformed aortic arch and tetralogy of
wall separating the right and left sides of the heart), Fallot. Researchers believe DiGeorge sequence is most
blood leaks from the left side of the heart to the right, often caused by mutations in genes in the region 22q11.
or from a higher pressure zone to a lower pressure
Marfan syndrome is a connective tissue disorder
zone. A major leakage can lead to enlargement of the
that causes tears in the aorta. Since the disease also causes
heart and failing circulation. The most common types
excessive bone growth,most Marfan syndrome patients
of septal defects are atrial septal defect, an opening
are over six feet tall. In athletes,and others,it can lead to
between the two upper heart chambers,and ventricu-
sudden death. Researchers believe the defect responsible
lar septal defect, an opening between the two lower
for Marfan’s syndrome is found in gene FBN1,on chro-
heart chambers. Ventricular septal defect accounts for
mosome 15.
about 15% of all cases of congenital heart disease in
the United States. About 32,000 infants are born every year with con-
genital heart disease, which is the most common birth
defect. About half of these cases require medical treat-
Cyanotic defects
ment. More than one million people with heart defects
Heart disorders that cause a decreased,inadequate are currently living in the United States.
amount of oxygen in blood pumped to the body are
called cyanotic defects. Cyanotic defects,including trun-
Causes and symptoms
cus arteriosus,total anomalous pulmonary venous return,
tetralogy of Fallot,transposition of the great arteries, In most cases,the causes of congenital heart disease
and tricuspid atresia,result in a blue discoloration of the are unknown. Genetic and environmental factors and
skin due to low oxygen levels. About 10% of cases of lifestyle habits can all be involved. The likelihood of hav-
900 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
traeh
latinegnoC
ing a child with a congenital heart disease increases if the
mother or father, another child, or another relative had KEY TERMS
congenital heart disease or a family history of sudden
death. Viral infections,such as German measles,can pro- Aorta—The main artery located above the heart
duce congenital heart disease. Women with diabetes and that pumps oxygenated blood out into the body.
phenylketonuriaalso are at higher risk of having chil- Many congenital heart defects affect the aorta.
dren with congenital heart defects. Many cases of congen-
Congenital—Refers to a disorder that is present at
ital heart disease result from the mother’s excessive use of
birth.
alcohol or taking illegal drugs, such as cocaine, while
pregnant. The mother’s exposure to certain anticonvulsant Cyanotic—Marked by bluish discoloration of the
and dermatologic drugs during pregnancy can also cause skin due to a lack of oxygen in the blood. It is one
congenital heart disease. There are many genetic condi- of the types of congenital heart disease.
tions, such as Down syndrome, which affect multiple Ductus—The blood vessel that joins the pul-
organs and can cause congenital heart disease. monary artery and the aorta. When the ductus
Symptoms of congenital heart disease in general does not close at birth, it causes a type of congeni-
include:shortness of breath,difficulty feeding in infan- tal heart disease called patent ductus arteriosus.
cy,sweating,cyanosis(bluish discoloration of the skin), Electrocardiograph (ECG, EKG)—A test used to
heart murmur,respiratory infections that recur excessive- measure electrical impulses coming from the heart
ly,stunted growth,and limbs and muscles that are under- in order to gain information about its structure or
developed. function.
Symptoms of specific types of congenital heart dis- Hypoplastic—Incomplete or underdevelopment
ease are as follows: of a tissue or organ. Hypoplastic left heart syn-
drome is the most serious type of congenital heart
•Patent ductus arteriosus:quick tiring,slow growth,sus-
disease.
ceptibility to pneumonia,rapid breathing. If the ductus
is small,there are no symptoms. Neuchal translucency—A pocket of fluid at the
back of an embryo’s neck visible via ultrasound
•Hypoplastic left heart syndrome:ashen color,rapid and
that, when thickened, may indicate the infant will
difficult breathing,inability to eat.
be born with a congenital heart defect.
•Obstruction defects:cyanosis (skin that is discolored
Septal—Relating to the septum, the thin muscle
blue),chest pain,tiring easily,dizzinessor fainting,
wall dividing the right and left sides of the heart.
congestive heart failure,and high blood pressure.
Holes in the septum are called septal defects.
•Septal defects: difficulty breathing, stunted growth.
Stenosis—The constricting or narrowing of an
Sometimes there are no symptoms.
opening or passageway.
•Cyanotic defects:cyanosis,sudden rapid breathing or
unconsciousness,and shortness of breath and fainting
during exercise.
fields and radio waves,can help physicians evaluate con-
genital heart disease,but is not always necessary. Physi-
Diagnosis cians also may use a chest x ray to look at the size and
location of the heart and lungs,or an electrocardiograph
Echocardiography and cardiac magnetic reso-
(ECG), which measures electrical impulses to create a
nance imaging (MRI) are used to confirm congenital
graph of the heart beat.
heart disease when it is suggested by the symptoms and
physical examination. An echocardiograph will display
an image of the heart that is formed by sound waves. It Treatment
detects valve and other heart problems. Fetal echocardio-
Congenital heart disease is treated with drugs and/or
graphy is used to diagnose congenital heart disease in
surgery. Drugs used include diuretics, which aid the
utero,usually after 20 weeks of pregnancy. Between 10
baby in excreting water and salts, and digoxin, which
and 14 weeks of pregnancy,physicians also may use an
strengthens the contraction of the heart,slows the heart-
ultrasound to look for a thickness at the nuchal translu-
beat,and removes fluid from tissues.
cency, a pocket of fluid in back of the embryo’s neck,
which may indicate a cardiac defect in 55% of cases. Surgical procedures seek to repair the defect as
Cardiac MRI, a scanning method that uses magnetic much as possible and restore circulation to as close to
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 901
Congenital
heart
disease
normal as possible. Sometimes,multiple surgical proce- been fatal can now be treated successfully. Research on
dures are necessary. Surgical procedures include:arterial diagnosing heart defects when the fetus is in the womb
switch, balloon atrial septostomy, balloon valvulo- may lead to future treatment to correct defects before
plasty,Damus-Kaye-Stansel procedure,Fontan proce- birth. Promising new prevention methods and treatments
dure,pulmonary artery banding,Ross procedure,shunt include genetic screening and the cultivation of cardiac
procedure,and venous switch or intra-atrial baffle. tissue in the laboratory that could be used to repair con-
genital heart defects.
Arterial switch,to correct transposition of the great
arteries,involves connecting the aorta to the left ventricle
and connecting the pulmonary artery to the right ventri- Resources
cle. Balloon atrial septostomy,also done to correct trans-
BOOKS
position of the great arteries,enlarges the atrial opening Mayo Clinic Heart Book.New York:William Morrow and
during heart catheterization. Balloon valvuloplasty uses a Company,2000.
balloon-tipped catheter to open a narrowed heart valve, Wild,C. L.,and M. J. Neary. Heart Defects in Children:What
improving the flow of blood in pulmonary stenosis. It is Every Parent Should Know.Minneapolis:Chronimed Pub-
sometimes used in aortic stenosis. Transposition of the lishing,2000.
great arteries can also be corrected by the Damus-Kaye- Williams,R. A. The Athlete and Heart Disease.Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,1999.
Stansel procedure,in which the pulmonary artery is cut
in two and connected to the ascending aorta and the far- PERIODICALS
thest section of the right ventricle. “Coping with Congenital Heart Disease in Your Baby.”Ameri-
can Family Physician59 (April 1,1999):1867.
For tricuspid atresia and pulmonary atresia, the
Hyett,Jon,et. al. “Using Fetal Nuchal Translucency to Secreen
Fontan procedure connects the right atrium to the pul-
for Major Congenital Cardiac Defects at 10–14 Weeks:
monary artery directly or with a conduit,and the atrial
Population Based Cohort Study.”Lancet318 (January
defect is closed. Pulmonary artery banding, narrowing 1999):81-85.
the pulmonary artery with a band to reduce blood flow
ORGANIZATIONS
and pressure in the lungs,is used for ventricular septal
American Heart Association. 7272 Greenville Ave.,Dallas,TX
defect,atrioventricular canal defect,and tricuspid atresia.
75231-4596. (214) 373-6300 or (800) 242-8721.
Later,the band can be removed and the defect corrected
<inquire@heart.org>. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
with open-heart surgery.
Congenital Heart Disease Information and Resources. 1561
To correct aortic stenosis,the Ross procedure grafts Clark Dr.,Yardley,PA 19067. <http://www.tchin.org>.
the pulmonary artery to the aorta. For tetralogy of Fallot, Texas Heart Institute Heart Information Service. P.O. Box
20345,Houston,TX 77225-0345. (800) 292-2221.
tricuspid atresia,or pulmonary atresia,the shunt proce-
<http://www.tmc.edu/thi/his.html>.
dure creates a passage between blood vessels, sending
blood into parts of the body that need it. For transposi-
Melissa Knopper
tion of the great arteries,venous switch creates a tunnel
inside the atria to re-direct oxygen-rich blood to the right
ventricle and aorta and venous blood to the left ventricle
and pulmonary artery.
When all other options fail,some patients may need Conjunctivitis
a heart transplant. Children with congenital heart disease
require lifelong monitoring, even after successful Definition
surgery. The American Heart Association recommends
Conjuctivitis is an inflammation or redness of the
regular dental check-ups and the preventive use of
lining of the white part of the eye and the underside of
antibioticsto protect patients from heart infections,or
the eyelid (conjunctiva) that can be caused by infection,
endocarditis. Since children with congenital heart dis-
allergic reaction,or physical agents like infrared or ultra-
ease have slower growth,nutritionis important. Physi-
violet light.
cians may also limit their athletic activity.
Description
Prognosis
Conjunctivitis is the inflammation of the conjuncti-
The outlook for children with congenital heart dis- va,a thin,delicate membrane that covers the eyeball and
ease has improved markedly in the past two decades. lines the eyelid. Conjunctivitis is an extremely common
Many types of congenital heart disease that would have eye problem because the conjunctiva is continually
902 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitivitcnujnoC
exposed to microorganisms and environmental agents
that can cause infections or allergic reactions. Conjunc-
tivitis can be acute or chronic depending upon how long
the condition lasts, the severity of symptoms, and the
type of organism or agent involved. It can also affect one
or both eyes and,if caused by infection,can be very easi-
ly transmitted to others during close physical contact,
particularly among children in a daycare center. Other
names for conjunctivitis include pink eye and red eye.
Causes and symptoms
Conjunctivitis may be caused by a viral infection,
such as a cold, acute respiratory infection, or disease
such as measles,herpes simplex,or herpes zoster. Symp-
toms include mild to severe discomfort in one or both
eyes,redness,swelling of the eyelids,and watery,yellow,
or green discharge. Symptoms may last anywhere from
experienced, and other predisposing factors, such as
several days to two weeks. Infection with an adenovirus,
upper respiratory complaints,allergies,sexually trans-
however,may also cause a significant amount of pus-like
mitted diseases,herpes simplex infections,and exposure
discharge and a scratchy,foreign body-type of sensation
to persons with pink eye. It may be helpful to learn
in the eye. This may also be accompanied by swelling
whether an aspect of an individual’s occupation may be
and tenderness of the lymph nodes near the ear.
the cause,for example,welding. Diagnostic tests are usu-
Bacterial conjunctivitis can occur in adults and chil-
ally not indicated unless initial treatment fails or an infec-
dren and is caused by organisms such as Staphylococcus,
tion with gonorrhea or chlamydia is suspected. In such
Streptococcus,and Hemophilus. Symptoms of bacterial
cases,the discharge may be cultured and Gram stained to
conjunctivitis include a pus-like discharge and crusty
determine the organism responsible for causing the condi-
eyelids after awakening. Redness of the conjunctiva can
tion. Cultures and smears are relatively painless.
be mild to severe and may be accompanied by swelling.
Persons with symptoms of conjunctivitis who are sexual-
ly active may possibly be infected with the bacteria that Treatment
cause either gonorrhea or chlamydia. There may be
The treatment of conjunctivitis depends on what
large amounts of pus-like discharge,and symptoms may
caused the condition. In all cases, warm compresses
include intolerance to light (photophobia), watery
applied to the affected eye several times a day may help
mucous discharge, and tenderness in the lymph nodes
to reduce discomfort.
near the ear that may persist for up to three months.
Conjunctivitis due to a viral infection, particularly
Conjunctivitis may also be caused by environmental
those due to adenoviruses,are usually treated by applying
hazards, such as wind, smoke, dust, and allergic reac-
warm compresses to the eye(s) and applying topical antibi-
tions caused by pollen,dust,or grass. Symptoms range
otic ointments to prevent secondary bacterial infections.
from itchingand redness to a mucous discharge. Persons
Viral conjunctivitis caused by herpes simplex should
who wear contact lenses may develop allergic conjunc-
be referred to an ophthalmologist. Topical steroids are com-
tivitis caused by the various eye solutions and foreign
monly prescribed in combination with antiviral therapy.
proteins contained in them.
In cases of bacterial conjunctivitis,a physician may
Other less common causes of conjunctivitis include
prescribe an antibiotic eye ointment or eye drops contain-
exposure to sun lamps or the electrical arcs used during
ing sodium sulfacetamide (Sulamyd) to be applied daily
welding,and problems with inadequate drainage of the
for seven to 14 days. If,after 72 hours,the condition does
tear ducts.
not improve,a physician or primary care provider should
be notified because the bacteria involved may be resistant
Diagnosis to the antibiotic used or the cause may not be bacterial.
An accurate diagnosis of conjunctivitis centers on For cases of conjunctivitis caused by a gonococcal
taking a patient history to learn when symptoms began, organism, a physician may prescribe an intramuscular
how long the condition has been going on,the symptoms injection of ceftriaxone (Rocephin) and a topical antibi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 903
Conjunctivitis
This person has severe conjunctivitis,most likely caused
by an allergic reaction.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Repro-
duced by permission.)
Homeopathically,there are a number of acute reme-
dies designed to treat conjunctivitis. These include Pul-
satilla (windflower, Pulsatilla nigricans), Belladonna,
and eyebright (Euphrasia officinalis). Eye drops, pre-
pared with homeopathic remedies and/or herbs,can be a
good substitute for pharmaceutical eye drops. Eye washes
can also be made. Herbal eyewashes made with eyebright
(1 tsp. dried herb steeped in 1 pint of boiling water) or
chamomile (Matricaria recutita; 2–3 tsp in 1 pt of boiling
water) may be helpful. Eyewashes should be strained and
cooled before use,and close attention should be paid to
make sure that any solution put into the eye is sterile.
Other simple home remedies may help relieve the
discomfort associated with conjunctivitis. A boric acid
eyewash can be used to clean and soothe the eyes. A
warm compress applied to the eyes for five to 10 minutes
three times a day can help relieve the discomfort of bac-
terial and viral conjunctivitis. A cool compress or cool,
damp tea bags placed on the eyes can ease the discomfort
of allergic conjunctivitis.
Prognosis
If treated properly,the prognosis for conjunctivitis is
good. Conjunctivitis caused by an allergic reaction
otic ointment containing erythromycin or bactracin to be
should clear up once the allergen is removed. However,
applied four times daily for two to three weeks. Sexual
allergic conjunctivitis will likely recur if the individual
partners should also be treated.
again comes into contact with the particular allergen.
With accompanying chlamydia infection,a topical Conjunctivitis caused by bacteria or a virus, if treated
antibiotic ointment containing erythromycin (Ilotycin) properly,is usually resolved in 10–14 days. If there is no
may be prescribed to be applied 1-2 times daily. In addi- relief of symptoms in 48–72 hours,or there is moderate
tion, oral erythromycin or tetracycline therapy may be to severe eye pain,changes in vision,or the conjunctivi-
indicated for three to four weeks. Here again, sexual tis is suspected to be caused by herpes simplex,a physi-
partners should also be treated. cian should be notified immediately. If untreated or if
Allergic conjunctivitis can be treated by removing treatment fails and is not corrected,conjunctivitis may
the allergic substance from a person’s environment, if cause visual impairmentby spreading to other parts of
possible; by applying cool compresses to the eye; and by the eye,such as the cornea.
administering eye drops four to six times daily for four
days. Also, the antihistamine diphenhydramine
Prevention
hydrochloride (Benadryl) may help to relieve itchy eyes.
Conjunctivitis can,in many cases,be prevented,or
at least the course of the disease can be shortened by fol-
Alternative treatment lowing some simple practices.
Conjunctivitis caused by gonococcal and chlamydial •Frequently wash hands using antiseptic soap,and use
infection usually requires conventional medical treat- single-use towels during the disease to prevent spread-
ment. With bacterial, viral, and allergic conjunctivitis, ing the infection.
however, alternative options can be helpful. Internal •Avoid chemical irritants and known allergens.
immune enhancement with supplementation can aid in
•If in an area where welding occurs,use the proper pro-
the resolution of bacterial and viral conjunctivitis.
tective eye wear and screens to prevent damaging the
Removal of the allergic agent is an essential step in treat-
eyes.
ing allergic conjunctivitis. As with any of the recom-
mended treatments,however,if no improvement is seen •Use a clean tissue to remove discharge from eyes,and
within 48–72 hours,a physician should be consulted. wash hands to prevent the spread of infection.
904 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitivitcnujnoC
Eyelid
Conjunctiva
Cornea
Lens
Conjunctivitis is the inflammation of the conjunctiva,a thin,
delicate membrane that covers the eyeball and lines the
eyelid.It may be caused by a viral infection,such as a cold
or acute respiratory infection,or by such diseases as
measles,herpes simplex,or herpes zoster.(Illustration by
Electronic Illustrators Group.)
Weber,Carol Martinez and Joseph Eichenbaum. “Acute Red
KEY TERMS Eye:Differentiating Viral Conjunctivitis From Other Less
Common Causes.”Postgraduate Medicine(May 1997):
185-195.
Adenovirus—A virus that affects the upper respira-
tory tract. OTHER
Griffith,H. Winter. “Conjunctivitis (Pink Eye).”ThriveOnline.
Chlamydia—The most common bacterial sexually
<http://thriveonline.oxygen.com>.
transmitted disease in the United States that often
accompanies gonorrhea and is known for its lack
Lisa Papp,RN
of evident symptoms in the majority of women.
Gonococcal—The bacteria Neisseria gonorrheae Consciousness disorders see Coma
that causes gonorrhea, a sexually transmitted
infection of the genitals and urinary tract. The
gonococcal organism may occasionally affect the
eye, causing blindness if not treated.
Herpes simplex virus—A virus that can cause
Constipation
fever and blistering on the skin, mucous mem-
branes, or genitalia.
Definition
Herpes zoster virus—Acute inflammatory virus
Constipation is an acute or chronic condition in
that attacks the nerve cells on the root of each
which bowel movements occur less often than usual or
spinal nerve with skin eruptions along a sensory
consist of hard,dry stools that are painful or difficult to
nerve ending.
pass. Bowel habits vary,but an adult who has not had a
Staphylococcus—A bacterial organism, looking
bowel movement in three days or a child who has not had
much like a cluster of grapes, that can infect vari-
a bowel movement in four days is considered constipated.
ous body systems.
Streptococcus—An organism that causes infections of
Description
either the upper respiratory or gastrointestinal tract.
Constipation is one of the most common medical
complaints in the United States. Constipation can occur
at any age,and is more common among individuals who
•If medication is prescribed,finish the course of antibi- resist the urge to move their bowels at their body’s sig-
otics, as directed, to make sure that the infection is nal. This often happens when children start school or
cleared up and does not recur. enter daycare and feel shy about asking permission to use
the bathroom.
•Avoid contact, such as vigorous physical activities,
with other persons until symptoms resolve. Constipation is more common in women than in
men and is especially apt to occur during pregnancy.
Age alone does not increase the frequency of constipa-
Resources tion, but elderly people (especially women) are more
likely to suffer from constipation.
BOOKS
“The Conjunctiva.”In Ophthamology Principles and Concepts. Although this condition is rarely serious,it can lead to:
8th ed. Ed. Frank Newell. St. Louis:Mosby-Year Books
•bowel obstruction
Inc.,1996.
Schwab,Ivan R.,and Chandler R. Dawson. “Conjunctiva.”In •chronic constipation
General Ophthamology.14th ed. Ed. Daniel G. Vaughan,
•hemorrhoids (a mass of dilated veins in swollen tissue
Taylor Asbury,and Paul Riordan-Eva. Norwalk,CT:
around the anus)
Appleton & Lange,1995.
Uphold,Constance R.,and Mary Virginia Graham. “Problems •hernia (a protrusion of an organ through a tear in the
of the Eyes.”In Clinical Guidelines in Adult Health. muscle wall)
Gainesville,FL:Barmarrae Books,1994.
•spastic colitis (irritable bowel syndrome,a condition
characterized by alternating periods of diarrhea and
PERIODICALS
constipation)
Brown,Melissa. “The Red Eye.”Current Concepts in Ophthal-
mology(Jan. 1995):9-15. •laxative dependency
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 905
Constipation
Chronic constipation may be a symptom of colorec- •tricyclic antidepressants (medications prescribed to
tal cancer, depression, diabetes, diverticulosis (small treat chronic pain,depression,headaches,and other ill-
pouches in the muscles of the large intestine),lead poi- nesses)
soning,or Parkinson’s disease.
An adult who is constipated may feel bloated,have a
In someone who is elderly or disabled,constipation headache,swollen abdomen,or pass rock-like feces; or
may be a symptom of bowel impaction,a more serious strain, bleed, or feel pain during bowel movements. A
condition in which feces are trapped in the lower part of constipated baby may strain,cry,draw the legs toward
the large intestine. A doctor should be called if an elderly the abdomen, or arch the back when having a bowel
or disabled person is constipated for a week or more or if movement.
a child seems to be constipated.
A doctor should be notified whenever constipation
Diagnosis
occurs after starting a new prescription,vitamin,or min-
eral supplement or is accompanied by blood in the stools, Everyone becomes constipated once in a while,but a
changes in bowel patterns,or feverand abdominal pain. doctor should be notified if significant changes in bowel
patterns last for more than a week or if symptoms contin-
ue more than three weeks after increasing activity and
Causes and symptoms
fiber and fluid intake.
Constipation usually results from not getting enough
The patient’s observations and medical history help
exercise,not drinking enough water,or from a diet that
a primary care physician diagnose constipation. The doc-
does not include an adequate amount of fiber-rich foods
tor uses his fingers to see if there is a hardened mass in
like beans,bran cereals,fruits,raw vegetables,rice,and
the abdomen, and may perform a rectal examination.
whole-grain breads.
Other diagnostic procedures include a barium enema,
Other causes of constipation include anal fissure (a which reveals blockage inside the intestine; laboratory
tear or crack in the lining of the anus); chronic kidney analysis of blood and stool samples for internal bleeding
failure; colon or rectal cancer; depression; hypercal- or other symptoms of systemic disease; and a sigmoi-
cemia(abnormally high levels of calcium in the blood); doscopy(examination of the sigmoid area of the colon
hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid gland); illness with a flexible tube equipped with a magnifying lens).
requiring complete bed rest; irritable bowel syndrome;
Physical and psychological assessments and a
and stress.
detailed history of bowel habits are especially important
Constipation can also be a side effect of:
when an elderly person complains of constipation.
•aluminum salts in antacids
•antihistamines
Treatment
•antipsychotic drugs
If changes in diet and activity fail to relieve occa-
•aspirin sional constipation,an over-the-counter laxative may be
•belladonna (Atopa belladonna, source of atropine, a used for a few days. Preparations that soften stools or add
medication used to relieve spasms and dilate the pupils bulk (bran, psyllium) work more slowly but are safer
of the eye) than Epsom salts and other harsh laxativesor herbal lax-
atives containing senna (Cassia senna) or buckthorn
•beta blockers (medications used to stabilize irregular
(Rhamnus purshianna),which can harm the nerves and
heartbeat,lower high blood pressure,reduce chest pain)
lining of the colon.
•blood pressure medications
A woman who is pregnant should never use a laxa-
•calcium channel blockers (medication prescribed to tive. Neither should anyone who is experiencing abdomi-
treat high blood pressure, chest pain, some types of nal pain,nausea,or vomiting.
irregular heartbeat and stroke,and some non-cardiac
A warm-water or mineral oil enema can relieve con-
diseases)
stipation,and a non-digestible sugar (lactulose) or spe-
•diuretics (drugs that promote the formation and secre-
cial electrolyte solution is recommended for adults and
tion of urine)
older children with stubborn symptoms.
•iron or calcium supplements
If a patient has an impacted bowel,the doctor inserts
•narcotics (potentially addictive drugs that relieve pain a gloved finger into the rectum and gently dislodges the
and cause mood changes) hardened feces.
906 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitapitsnoC
Alternative treatment
Initially, alternative practitioners will suggest that
the patient drink an adequate amount of water each day
(six to eight glasses),exercise on a regular basis,and eat
a diet high in soluble and insoluble fibers. Soluble fibers
include pectin,flax,and gums; insoluble fibers include
psyllium and brans from grains like wheat and oats.
Fresh fruits and vegetables contain both soluble and
insoluble fibers. Castor oil, applied topically to the
abdomen and covered by a heat source (a heating pad or
hot water bottle), can help relieve constipation when
used nightly for 20–30 minutes.
Acupressure
This needleless form of acupunctureis said to relax
the abdomen,ease discomfort,and stimulate regular bowel
movements when diet and exercise fail to do so. After lying
down,the patient closes his eyes and takes a deep breath.
For two minutes,he applies gentle fingertip pressure to a
point about two and one-half inches below the navel.
Accupressure can also be applied to the outer edges
of one elbow crease and maintained for 30 seconds be found in one of the many home remedy books on
before pressing the crease of the other elbow. This should homeopathic medicine. A constitutional prescription also
be done three times a day to relieve constipation. can help rebalance someone who is struggling with con-
stipation.
Aromatherapy
Massage
Six drops of rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) and
six drops of thyme (Thymus spp.) diluted by 1 oz of Massaging the leg from knee to hip in the morning,
almond oil, olive oil, or another carrier oil can relieve at night,and before trying to move the bowels is said to
constipation when used to massage the abdomen. relieve constipation. There is also a specific Swedish
massage technique that can help relieve constipation.
Herbal therapy
Yoga
A variety of herbal therapies can be useful in the
treatment of constipation. Several herbs, including The knee-chest position,said to relieve gas and stim-
chamomile (Matricaria recutita),dandelion (Taraxacum ulate abdominal organs,involves:
mongolicum),and burdock (Arctium lappa),act as bit-
•standing straight with arms at the sides
ters, stimulating the movement of the digestive and
•lifting the right knee toward the chest
excretory systems. There are also “laxative”herbs that
assist with bowel movement. Two of these are senna •grasping the right ankle with the left hand
(Cassia senna) and buckthorn (Rhamnus purshiana).
•pulling the leg as close to the chest as possible
These “laxative”herbs are stronger acting on elimination
than bitters and can sometimes cause cramping (mixing •holding the position for about eight seconds
them with a calming herb like fennel or caraway can help •repeating these steps with the left leg
reduce cramping). Both senna and buckthorn are power-
The cobra position,which can be repeated as many
ful herbs that are best used with direction from an experi-
as four time a day,involves:
enced practitioner, since they can have adverse side
effects and the patient may become dependent on them. •lying on the stomach with legs together
•placing the palms just below the shoulders, holding
Homeopathy elbows close to the body
Homeopathyalso can offer assistance with consti- •inhaling,then lifting the head (face forward) and chest
pation. There are acute remedies for constipation that can off the floor
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 907
Constipation
Transverse colon
Stool
Descending colon
Sigmoid colon
Rectum
Constipation is an acute or chronic condition in which
bowel movements occur less often than usual or consist of
hard,dry stools that are painful or difficult to pass.(Illustra-
tion by Electronic Illustrators Group).
•keeping the navel in contact with the floor Karlsrud,K.,and P. Schneider. “Tummy Troubles.”Parents,
Apr. 1997,83-84.
•looking as far upward as possible
•holding this position for three to six seconds OTHER
“Constipation.”ThriveOnline.15 Mar. 1998 <http://thrive
•exhaling and lowering the chest
online.oxygen.com>.
Prognosis Maureen Haggerty
Changes in diet and exercise usually eliminate the
Constitutional homeopathic remedies see
problem.
Homeopathic remedies, constitutional
prescribing
Prevention
Consumption see Tuberculosis
Most Americans consume between 11–18 g of fiber
a day. Consumption of 30 grams of fiber and between six
and eight glasses of water each day can generally prevent
constipation.
Thirty-five grams of fiber a day (an amount equal to
five servings of fruits and vegetables,and a large bowl of Contact dermatitis
high-fiber cereal) can relieve constipation.
Definition
Daily use of 500 mg vitamin C and 400 mg magne-
sium can prevent constipation. If symptoms do occur, Contact dermatitisis the name for any skin inflam-
each dosage can be increased by 100 mg a day,up to a mation that occurs when the skin’s surface comes in con-
maximum of 5,000 mg vitamin C and 1,000 mg magne- tact with a substance originating outside the body. There
sium. Use of preventive doses should be resumed after are two kinds of contact dermatitis,irritant and allergic.
relief occurs,and vitamin C should be decreased to the
pre-diarrhea dosage if the patient develops diarrhea.
Description
Sitting on the toilet for 10 minutes at the same time
Thousands of natural and man-made substances can
every day, preferably after a meal, can induce regular
cause contact dermatitis,which is the most common skin
bowel movements. This may not become effective for a
condition requiring medical attention and the foremost
few months, and it is important to defecate whenever
source of work-related disease. Florists,domestic work-
necessary.
ers, hairdressers, food preparers, and employees in
Fiber supplements containing psyllium (Plantago industry, construction, and health care are the people
psyllium) usually become effective within about 48 hours most at risk of contracting work-related contact dermati-
and can be used every day without causing dependency. tis. Americans spend roughly $300 million a year in their
Powdered flaxseed (Linium usitatissimum) works the quest for relief from contact dermatitis,not counting the
same way. Insoluble fiber,like wheat or oat bran,is as considerable sums devoted by governments and business-
effective as psyllium but may give the patient gas at first. es to regulating and policing the use of skin-threatening
chemicals in the workplace. But exactly how many peo-
Resources ple suffer from contact dermatitis remains unclear; a 1997
article in the Journal of the American Medical Associa-
BOOKS
tionnotes that figures ranging from 1% to 15% have been
The Consumer’s Medical Desk Reference.Ed. Charles B.
put forward for Western industrial nations.
Inlander. New York:Hyperion,1995.
The Editors of Time-Life Books. The Medical Advisor:The
Complete Guide to Alternative and Conventional Treat- Causes and symptoms
ments.Alexandria,VA:Time Life,Inc.,1996.
New Choices in Natural Healing.Ed. Bill Gottlieb,et al. Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) is the more com-
Emmaus,PA:Rodale Press,1995. monly reported of the two kinds of contact dermatitis,
and is seen in about 80% of cases. It can be caused by
PERIODICALS
soaps, detergents, solvents, adhesives, fiberglass, and
Harari D.,et al. “Bowel Habit in Relation to Age and Gender:
other substances that are able to directly injure the skin.
Findings from the National Health Interview Survey and
Clinical Implications.”Archives of Internal Medicine Most attacks are slight and confined to the hands and
(Feb. 1996):315-320. forearms,but can affect any part of the body that comes
908 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sititamred
tcatnoC
in contact with an irritating substance. The symptoms
can take many forms: redness, itching, crusting,
swelling,blistering,oozing,dryness,scaliness,thicken-
ing of the skin,and a feeling of warmth at the site of con-
tact. In extreme cases, severe blistering can occur and
open sores can form. Jobs that require frequent skin
exposure to water,such as hairdressing and food prepara-
tion,can make the skin more susceptible to ICD.
Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) results when
repeated exposure to an allergen (an allergy-causing sub-
stance) triggers an immune response that inflames the
skin. Tens of thousands of drugs,pesticides,cosmetics,
food additives, commercial chemicals, and other sub-
stances have been identified as potential allergens. Fewer
than 30, however, are responsible the majority of ACD
cases. Common culprits include poison ivy,poison oak,
and poison sumac; fragrances and preservatives in cosmet-
ics and personal care products; latex items such as gloves
and condoms; and formaldehyde. Many people find that
they are allergic to the nickel in inexpensive jewelry. ACD
is usually confined to the area of skin that comes in contact
with the allergen,typically the hands or face. Symptoms
range from mild to severe and resemble those of ICD; a
patch test may be needed to determine which kind of con-
tact dermatitis a person is suffering from.
cessful. Moreover,patch testing works only with ACD,
though it is considered an essential step in ruling out ICD.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis begins with a physical examinationand
Treatment
asking the patient questions about his or her health and
daily activities. When contact dermatitis is suspected,the The best treatment for contact dermatitis is to identify
doctor attempts to learn as much as possible about the the allergen or irritating substance and avoid further con-
patient’s hobbies,workplace duties,use of medications tact with it. If the culprit is,for instance,a cosmetic,avoid-
and cosmetics,etc.—anything that might shed light on ance is a simple matter,but in some situations,such as an
the source of the disease. In some cases,an examination allergy to an essential workplace chemical for which no
of the home or workplace is undertaken. If the dermatitis substitute can be found,avoidance may be impossible or
is mild,responds well to treatment,and does not recur, force the sufferer to find new work or make other drastic
ordinarily the investigation is at an end. More difficult changes in his or her life. Barrier creams and protective
cases require patch testing to identify the allergen. clothing such as gloves,masks,and long-sleeved shirts are
ways of coping with contact dermatitis when avoidance is
Two methods of patch testing are currently used. The
impossible,though they are not always effective.
most widely used method, the Finn chamber method,
employs a multiwell,aluminum patch. Each well is filled For the symptoms themselves, treatments in mild
with a small amount of the allergen being tested and the cases include cool compresses and nonprescription
patch is taped to normal skin on the patient’s upper back. lotions and ointments. When the symptoms are severe,
After 48 hours,the patch is removed and an initial reading corticosteroids applied to the skin or taken orally are
is taken. A second reading is made a few days later. The used. Contact dermatitis that leads to a bacterial skin
second method of patch testing involves applying a small infection is treated with antibiotics.
amount of the test substance to directly to normal skin
and covering it with a dressing that keeps air out and
Alternative treatment
keeps the test substance in (occlusive dressing). After 48
hours, the dressing is taken off to see if a reaction has Herbal remedies have been used for centuries to
occurred. Identifying the allergen may require repeated treat skin disorders including contact dermatitis. An
testing,can take weeks or months,and is not always suc- experienced herbalist can recommend the remedies that
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 909
Contact
dermatitis
The abdomen of a male patient afflicted with contact der-
matitis,triggered by an allergic reaction to a nickel belt
buckle.(Photograph by Dr.P.Marazzi, Custom Medical Stock
Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
contact dermatitis becomes a chronic and disabling con-
KEY TERMS dition that can have a profound effect on employability
and quality of life.
Antibiotics—Substances used against microorgan-
isms that cause infection. Prevention
Corticosteroids—A group of anti-inflammatory Avoidance of known or suspected allergens or irritat-
substances often used to treat skin conditions. ing substances is the best prevention. If avoidance is diffi-
cult,barrier creams and protective clothing can be tried.
Immune response—The protective reaction by the
Skin that comes in contact with an offending substance
immune system against foreign antigens (sub-
should be thoroughly washed as soon as possible.
stances that the body perceives as potentially dan-
gerous). The immune system combats disease by
Resources
neutralizing or destroying antigens.
BOOKS
Swerlick,Robert A.,and Thomas J. Lawley. “Eczema,Psoriasis,
Cutaneous Infections,Acne,and Other Common Skin Dis-
orders.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed.
will be most effective for an individual’s condition.
Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Among the herbs often recommended are: Wolf Jr.,John E. “Contact Dermatitis.”In Conn’s Current
•Burdock (Arctium lappa) minimizes inflammation and Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia:W. B.
Saunders Co.,1996.
boosts the immune system. It is taken internally as a tea
or tincture (a concentrated herbal extract prepared with PERIODICALS
alcohol). Beltrani,Vincent S.,and Vincent P. Beltrani. “Contact Dermati-
tis.”Annals of Allergy,Asthma,and Immunology78 (Feb.
•Calendula (Calendula officinalis) is a natural antiseptic
1997):160-75.
and anti-inflammatory agent. It is applied topically in a
Leung,Donald Y. M.,et al. “Allergic and Immunologic Skin
lotion,ointment,or oil to the affected area.
Disorders.”Journal of the American Medical Association
•Aloe (Aloe barbadensis) soothes skin irritations. The 278 (1997):1914+.
gel is applied topically to the affected area. Rietschel,Robert L. “Occupational Contact Dermatitis.”The
Lancet349 (1997):1093+.
A homeopath treating a patient with contact dermati-
tis will do a thorough investigation of the individual’s his- OTHER
tory and exposures before prescribing a remedy. One Stewart,Leslie. “Contact Dermatitis.”National Jewish Medical
homeopathic remedy commonly prescribed to relieve the Research Center Page.25 Aug. 1995. 17 June 1998
<http://www.nationaljewish.org/main.html>.
itching associated with contact dermatitis is Rhus toxico-
dendrontaken internally three to four times daily.
Howard Baker
Poison ivy,poison oak,and poison sumac are common
culprits in cases of allergic contact dermatitis. Following Contact lenses see Eye glasses and contact
exposure to these plants,rash development may be prevent- lenses
ed by washing the area with soap and water within 15 min-
Continent urinary diversion see Urinary
utes of exposure. The leaves of jewelweed (Impatiensspp.),
diversion surgery
which often grows near poison ivy,may neutralize the poi-
son-ivy allergen if rubbed on the skin right after contact. Continuous ambulatory electrocardiography
Several topical remedies may help relieve the itching asso- see Holter monitoring
ciated with allergic contact dermatitis,including the juice
Continuous positive airway see Inhalation
of plantain leaves (Plantago major); a paste made of equal
parts of green clay and goldenseal root (Hydrastis therapies
canadensis); a paste made of salt,water,clay,and pepper-
mint (Mentha piperita) oil; and calamine lotion.
Prognosis Contraception
If the offending substance is promptly identified and
Definition
avoided,the chances of a quick and complete recovery
are excellent. Otherwise, symptom management—not Contraception (birth control) prevents pregnancy
cure—is the best doctors can offer. For some people, by interfering with the normal process of ovulation,fer-
910 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitpecartnoC
er methods include the condom,diaphragm,and cervi-
cal cap. The condom is the only form of birth control
that also protects against sexually transmitted dis-
eases,including HIV (the virus that causes AIDS).
•Spermicides—These medications kill sperm on con-
tact. Most spermicides contain nonoxynyl-9. Spermi-
cides come in many different forms such as jelly,foam,
tablets, and even a transparent film. All are placed in
the vagina. Spermicides work best when they are used
at the same time as a barrier method.
tilization,and implantation. There are different kinds of
•Intrauterine devices—Intrauterine contraceptive
birth control that act at different points in the process.
devices (IUDs) are inserted into the uterus,where they
stay from one to 10 years. An IUDprevents the fertil-
Purpose ized egg from implanting in the lining of the uterus,and
may have other effects as well.
Every month, a woman’s body begins the process
•Tubal sterilization—Tubal sterilization is a permanent
that can potentially lead to pregnancy. An egg (ovum)
form of contraception for women. Each fallopian tube
matures,the mucus that is secreted by the cervix (a cylin-
is either tied or burned closed. The sperm cannot reach
drical-shaped organ at the lower end of the uterus)
the egg,and the egg cannot travel to the uterus.
changes to be more inviting to sperm,and the lining of
the uterus grows in preparation for receiving a fertilized •Vasectomy—is the male form of sterilization, and
egg. Any woman who wants to prevent pregnancy must should also be considered permanent. In vasectomy,
use a reliable form of birth control. the vas defrens,the tiny tubes that carry the sperm into
the semen,are cut and tied off. Thus,no sperm can get
Birth control (contraception) is designed to interfere
into the semen.
with the normal process and prevent the pregnancy that
could result. There are different kinds of birth control Unfortunately,there is no perfect form of birth con-
that act at different points in the process,from ovulation, trol. Only abstinence (not having sexual intercourse) can
through fertilization,to implantation. Each method has protect against unwanted pregnancy with 100% reliability.
its own side effects and risks. Some methods are more The failure rates,which means the rates of pregnancy,for
reliable than others. most forms of birth control are quite low. However,some
forms of birth control are more difficult or inconvenient to
Although there are many different types of birth
use than others. In actual practice,the birth control meth-
control,they can be divided into a few groups based on
ods that are more difficult or inconvenient have much
how they work. These groups include:
higher failure rates because they are not used faithfully.
•Hormonal methods—These use medications (hor-
mones) to prevent ovulation. Hormonal methods
include birth control pills (oral contraceptives),Depo Description
Provera injections and Norplant.
All the different forms of birth control have one thing
•Barrier methods—These methods work by preventing in common. They are only effective if used faithfully.
the sperm from getting to and fertilizing the egg. Barri- Birth control pills will work only if taken every day; the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 911
Contraception
Types Of Contraceptives
Effectiveness Predicted (%) Actual (%)
Birth control pills 99.9 97
Condoms 98 88
Depo Provera 99.7 99.7
Diaphragm 94 82
IUDs 99.2 97
Norplant 99.7 99.7
Tubal sterilization 99.8 99.6
Spermicides 97 79
Vasectomy 99.9 99.9
Various types of contraception.(Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced by permission.)
methods,IUDs,tubal sterilization).
Precautions
There are risks associated with some forms of birth
control. Some of the risks of each method are listed
below:
•Birth control pills—The hormone (estrogen) in birth
control pills can increase the risk of heart attack in
women over 40 who smoke.
•IUD—The IUD can increase the risk of serious pelvic
infection. The IUD can also injure the uterus by poking
into or through the uterine wall. Surgery might be need-
ed to fix this.
•Tubal sterilization—“Tying the tubes”is a surgical pro-
cedure and has all the risks of any other surgery,includ-
ing the risks of anesthesia,infection,and bleeding.
Preparation
No specific preparation is needed before using con-
traception. However,a woman must be sure that she is
not already pregnant before using a hormonal method or
having an IUD placed.
diaphragm is effective only if used during every episode
of sexual intercourse. The same is true for condoms and Aftercare
the cervical cap. Some methods are automatically work-
No aftercare is needed.
ing every day, no matter what. These methods include
Depo Provera,Norplant,the IUD,and tubal sterilization.
Risks
There are many different ways to use birth control.
They can be divided into several groups: Many methods of birth control have side effects.
Knowing the side effects can help a woman to determine
•By mouth (oral)—Birth control pills must be taken by
which method of birth control is right for her.
mouth every day.
•Hormonal methods—The hormones in birth control
•Injected—Depo Provera is a hormonal medication that
pills,Depo Provera,and Norplant can cause changes in
is given by injection every three months.
menstrual periods,changes in mood,weight gain,acne,
•Implanted—Norplant is a long-acting hormonal form
and headaches. In addition,it may take many months to
of birth control that is implanted under the skin of the
begin ovulating again once a woman stops using Depo
upper arm.
Provera or Norplant.
•Vaginal—Spermicides and barrier methods work in the
•Barrier methods—A woman must insert the diaphragm
vagina.
in just the right way to be sure that it works properly.
•Intra-uterine—The IUD is inserted into the uterus. Some women get more urinary tract infections if they
use a diaphragm. This is because the diaphragm can
•Surgical—Tubal sterilization is a form of surgery. A
press against the urethra, the tube that connects the
doctor must perform the procedure in a hospital or sur-
bladder to the outside.
gical clinic. Many women need general anesthesia.
•Spermicides—Some women and men are allergic to
The methods of birth control differ from each other
spermicides or find them irritating to the skin.
in the timing of when they are used. Some methods of
birth control must be used specifically at the time of sex- •IUD—The IUD is a foreign body that stays inside the
ual intercourse (condoms,diaphragm,cervical cap,sper- uterus,and the uterus tries to get it out. A woman may
micides). All other methods of birth control must be have heavier menstrual periods and more menstrual
working all the time to provide protection (hormonal cramping with an IUD in place.
912 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitpecartnoC
A variety of intrauterine contraceptive devices.The proba-
bility of a pregnancy for year of use is about 2 to 3%.IUDs
made with copper coils should be replaced every 3 to 5
years.(Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
Causes and symptoms
KEY TERMS
There are a number of pathologies and diseases that
can lead to joint contractures. The primary causes result-
Fallopian tubes—The thin tubes that connect the
ing in a joint contraction are muscle imbalance, pain,
ovary to the uterus. Ova (eggs) travel from the
prolonged bed rest,and immobilization. Because of the
ovary to the uterus. If the egg has been fertilized, it
frequency of fractures and surgery, immobilization is
can implant in the uterus.
the most frequent cause of joint contractures. Symptoms
Fertilization—The joining of the sperm and the include a significant loss of motion to any specific joint
egg; conception. that results in immobility. If the contracture is of a signif-
icant degree,pain can result even without any voluntary
Implantation—The process in which the fertilized
joint movement.
egg embeds itself in the wall of the uterus.
Ovulation—The release of an egg (ovum) from the
ovary.
Diagnosis
Manual testing of joint mobility by a healthcare pro-
fessional skilled in joint mobilization techniques (e.g. a
•Tubal sterilization—Some women report increased
physical therapist) will identify indications of restricted
menstrual discomfort after tubal ligation. It is not
structures within the joint. Measuring the motion of the
known if this is related to the tubal ligation itself.
joint with a device termed a “goniometer”can be useful
There is no perfect form of birth control. Every if the decrease of motion can be shown to be a proven
method has a small failure rate and side effects. Some result of a joint contracture. X rays can be of some bene-
methods carry additional risks. However,every method fit in the diagnosis of contractures, because a visible
of birth control can be effective if used properly. decrease in joint space may indicate a tight,contracted
joint. Most physicians will make the diagnosis after a
Resources thorough physical examinationinvolving physical and
manual testing of the joint motion.
BOOKS
Osathanondh,Rapin,Michael R. Stelluto,and Karen J. Carl-
son. “Contraception.”In Primary Care of Women,ed.
Karen J. Carlson and Stephanie A. Eisenstat. St. Louis: Treatment
Mosby-Year Book,Inc.,1995.
Osathanondh,Rapin. “Conception Control.”In Kistner’s Gyne- Manual techniques
cology,ed. Kenneth J. Ryan,Ross S. Berkowitz,and
Joint mobilization and stretching of soft tissues is a
Robert L. Barbieri. St. Louis:Mosby,1995.
common technique used to increase joint elasticity.
Structures are stretched in similar directions to those
Amy B. Tuteur,MD
which take place upon normal joint motion. Some
healthcare professionals may use some form of heat prior
to the stretching and mobilization. If appropriate,exer-
cisemay follow manual techniques to help maintain the
additional motion achieved.
Contractures
Definition
Mechanical techniques
Contractures are the chronic loss of joint motion due
to structural changes in non-bony tissue. These non-bony Devices known as continuous passive motion
tissues include muscles,ligaments,and tendons. machines are very popular,especially following surgery
of joints. Continuous passive motion machines (CPM)
are specifically adjusted to each individual’s need. This
Description
method is administered within the first 24–72 hours after
Contractures can occur at any joint of the body. This the injury or surgery. The joint is mechanically moved
joint dysfunction may be a result of immobilizationfrom through the patient’s tolerable motion. CPM machines
injury or disease; nerve injury,such as spinal cord dam- have been proved to accelerate the return motion process,
age and stroke; or muscle,tendon,or ligament disease. allowing patients more function in less time.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 913
Contractures
appropriate,and range-of-motion exercises either manu-
KEY TERMS ally or mechanically aided. These activities should be
started as early as possible for optimal results.
Mobilization—Making movable, restoring the
power of motion in a joint. Movement which Resources
increases joint mobility.
BOOKS
Muscle tone—Also termed tonus; the normal Umphred,Darcy A. “Traumatic Spinal Cord Injury.”In Neuro-
state of balanced tension in the tissues of the body, logical Rehabilitation. St. Louis:C. V. Mosby Co.,1990.
especially the muscles.
PERIODICALS
Ito,Caryn S. “Conservative Management of Joint Deformities
and Dynamic Posturing.”Orthopaedic Physical Therapy
Clinics of North America2,no. 1 (Mar. 1993):25-38.
Casting or splinting Murphy,John. “Continuous Passive Motion.”Advance Maga-
zine for Physical Therapists(Jan. 1996):8.
Casting or splinting techniques are used to provide a
ORGANIZATIONS
constant stretch to the soft tissues surrounding a joint. It
The American College of Rheumatology. 1800 Century Place,
is most effective when used to increase motion of a joint
Suite 250,Atlanta,GA 30345. (404) 633-3777. <http://
from prolonged immobilization. It is also popular for
www.rheumatology.org>.
treating contractures resulting from an increase in muscle
American Physical Therapy Association. 1111 North Fairfax
tone from nerve injury. After an initial holding cast is
St.,Alexandria,Virginia 22314. (800) 999-2782. <https://
applied for seven to 10 days,a series of positional casts
www.apta.org>.
are applied at weekly intervals. Before the application of
each new cast,the joint is moved as much as can be toler- Jeffrey P. Larson,RPT
ated by the patient,and measured by a goniometer. When
as much motion as possible is obtained after stretching, Conversion disorder see Somatoform
another final cast is applied to maintain the newly
disorders
acquired motion.
Cooley’s anemia see Thalassemia
Surgery
In some cases the contracture may be severe and not
respond to conservative treatment. In this event,manipu-
lation of the joint under a general anesthesia may be nec-
Cooling treatments
essary.
Definition
Alternative treatment
Cooling treatments lower body temperature in order
In some areas of the body,chiropractictechniques to relieve pain,swelling,constriction of blood vessels,
have been found to be useful to improve motion. Mas- and to decrease the liklihood of cellular damage by slow-
sage therapycan be beneficial by promoting additional ing the metabolism. Sponge baths,cold compresses,and
circulation to joint structures,causing better elasticity. cold packs are all wet cooling treatments. Dry treat-
Yogacan help prevent as well as rehabilitate a contrac- ments,such as ice bags and chemical cold packs,are also
ture and can facilitate the return of joint mobility. used to lower body temperature.
Prognosis Purpose
Prognosis of contractures will depend upon the The most common reason for cooling a body is
cause of the contracture. In general,the earlier the treat- feveror hyperthermia (extremely high fever). The body
ment for the contracture begins,the better the prognosis. can sustain temperatures up to 104°F (40°C) with rela-
tive safety; however, when temperatures rise above
104°F (40°C),damage to the brain,muscles,blood,and
Prevention
kidneys is increasingly likely. Cooling treatments are
Prevention of contractures and deformities from also applied immediately following sprains, bruises,
spinal cord injury, fracture, and immobilization is burns,eye injuries,and muscle spasms to help alleviate
achieved through a program of positioning,splinting if the resulting swelling,pain,and discoloration of the skin.
914 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stnemtaert
gnilooC
Cooling treatments slow chemical reactions within Neuroprotection.”Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews
the body. For this reason,cooling tissues below normal 21 (Jan. 1997):31-44.
temperature (98.6°F/37°C) can prevent injury from inad- Imamaki M.,T. Hirayama,and M. Nakajima. “Separate-
equate oxygen or nutrition. Cold water drowning vic- Hypothermia Retrograde Cerebral Perfusion.”Annals of
Thoracic Surgery63 (Feb. 1997):54754-54758.
tims suffering from hypothermia(cooling of the body
Plattner,O.,et al. “Efficacy of Intraoperative Cooling Meth-
below its normal temperature) have been successfully
ods.”Anesthesiology87 (Nov. 1997):1089-1095.
resuscitated after long periods underwater without med-
ical complications because of this effect. For the past 40
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
years, heart surgeons have been experimenting with
hypothermia to protect tissues from lack of blood circu-
lation during an operation. Neurosurgeons are also work-
ing with hypothermia to protect the very sensitive brain
tissues during periods of absent or reduced blood flow.
Coombs’ tests
Description Definition
Depending on the medical need, various cooling
Coombs’tests are blood tests that identify the causes
methods are used.
of anemia.
•Cold packs and ice bags are placed on a localized site
and provide topical relief. These compresses should be
Purpose
covered with a waterproof material to protect the skin.
Repeated treatments produce the desired pain and Anemia, which literally means no blood, refers to
swelling relief. blood with abnormally low oxygen-carrying capacity.
The hemoglobin in red blood cells carries oxygen. One
•Cold treatments are placed on the groin and under the
of the many causes of anemia is destruction of red blood
arms to treat hyperthermia. Treatments are refreshed
cells,a process called hemolysis (hemomeans blood and
periodically until the appropriate temperature is attained.
lysis means disintegration). A simple blood count
•A tepid sponge bath relieves fever without cooling the
detects anemia. Even the test done before a blood dona-
body too fast. Eighty degrees Farenheit is still 20°F
tion can identify anemia. To detect hemolysis requires
below body temperature and yet warm enough not to
other tests. The Coombs’tests are conducted in order to
drive blood from the skin,thereby preventing the cool-
determine the cause of anemia.
ing from getting to the body’s core. Limbs are bathed
One characteristic of hemolysis is the autoimmune
first and then the chest,abdomen,back,and buttocks.
response against the body’s red blood cells. Instead of
•Perfusion of isolated regions like the brain by using
protecting the body from outside agents, the immune
cooled blood is an experimental treatment, offering
system attacks parts of its own body with a deluge of
promising results for the treatment of stroke.
antibodies. Autoimmunity is thought to be the cause of
many collagen-vascular diseases,including rheumatoid
Preparation arthritisand systemic lupus erythematosus. It is also
Topical treatments are prepared with ice,cold water the cause of the autoimmune hemolytic anemias. The
(59°F/15°C), and chemical cold packs. Tepid baths Coombs’tests detect the antibodies responsible for the
should be 80–93°F (26.7–34°C). destruction of the red blood cells.
Causes of autoimmune hemolytic anemiainclude:
Risks
•drugs such as penicillin, methyldopa (lowers blood
Small children,adults with circulation problems,and pressure), and quinidine (treats heart rhythm distur-
the elderly are all at risk of tissue damage. Rapid cooling bances)
causes chills,which in effect raise the body’s temperature •cancers of the lymph system—Hodgkin’s disease and
by raising its metabolism. Blood clots may form from lymphomas
thickened blood caused by the temperature change.
•virus infections
•collagen-vascular diseases
Resources
•mismatched blood transfusions
PERIODICALS
Barone,F. C.,G. Z. Feuerstein,and R. F. White. “Brain Cool- •Rh incompatibility between a mother and fetus. This
ing During Transient Focal Ischemia Provides Complete disease is called erythroblastosis fetalis
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 915
Coombs’
tests
bruise at the site of the puncture or punctures. It is
KEY TERMS extremely rare for the needle to injure an important struc-
ture such as an artery or a nerve.
Antibody—A protein made by the immune system
and used as a weapon against foreign invaders in Normal results
the body.
If the Coombs’ tests are negative, the anemia is
Antigen—The chemical that stimulates an immune
unlikely to be autoimmune, and the hematologist will
response.
have to search elsewhere for a cause.
Anemia—Reduced oxygen-carrying capacity of
the blood, due to too little hemoglobin or too few
Abnormal results
red blood cells.
If the test is positive,the antigens that react will nar-
Collagen-vascular disease—Various diseases
row the search for a cause. Coombs’tests are also done
inflaming and destroying connective tissue.
for blood transfusion reactions to determine why the
Hematologist—Physician who specializes in dis- transfused blood did not match, and when there is a
eases of the blood. chance a newborn may have an Rh problem.
Hemoglobin—The red pigment in blood that car-
ries oxygen. Resources
Hemolysis—Breaking apart red blood cells. BOOKS
Rh—A blood typing group, like the ABO system. Rosse,Wendell,and H. Franklin Bunn. “Hemolytic Anemias
and Acute Blood Loss.”In Harrison’s Principles of Inter-
When a mother is Rh negative and her baby is Rh
nal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:
positive, she may develop antibodies to the baby’s
McGraw-Hill,1997.
blood that will cause it to hemolyze.
Schreiber,Alan D. “Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia.”In Cecil
Textbook of Medicine,ed. J. Claude Bennett and Fred
Plum. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Many times the cause cannot be identified.
Teresa Norris,RN
Description
Coordination tests see Balance and
There are two Coombs’tests. A direct Coombs’test coordination tests
detects the two different antigens that might induce
COPD see Emphysema; Chronic
hemolysis in the patient’s red blood cells. An indirect
obstructive lung disease
Coombs’test looks for antibodies to someone else’s red
blood cells in the patient’s serum (the blood without the Copper deficiency see Mineral deficiency
cells). Combining the two tests gives clues to the origin
Copper excess see Wilson’s disease
of the hemolysis.
Preparation
No preparation is needed for this test. It will proba-
bly be among the second or third set of blood tests done
Cor pulmonale
after anemia is diagnosed and there is a suspicion that its
cause is hemolysis.
Definition
Cor pulmonale is an increase in bulk of the right
Aftercare
ventricle of the heart,generally caused by chronic dis-
Coombs’tests are done on blood that is drawn from eases or malfunction of the lungs. This condition can
the arm. lead to heart failure.
Risks Description
Taking blood for testing is the most common med- Cor pulmonale,or pulmonary heart disease,occurs in
ical procedure performed. The worst complication is a 25% of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
916 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
elanomlup
roC
ease (COPD). In fact,about 85% of patients diagnosed
with cor pulmonale have COPD. Chronic bronchitisand KEY TERMS
emphysemaare types of COPD. High blood pressure in
the blood vessels of the lungs (pulmonary hypertension) Ventricle—A cavity, as in the brain or heart. The
causes the enlargement of the right ventricle. In addition right ventricle of the heart drives blood from the
to COPD,cor pulmonale may also be caused by lung dis- heart into the pulmonary artery, which supplies
eases,such as cystic fibrosis,pulmonary embolism,and blood to the lungs.
pneumoconiosis. Loss of lung tissue after lung surgery
or certain chest-wall disturbances can produce cor pul-
monale,as can neuromuscular diseases,such as muscu-
lar dystrophy. A large pulmonary thromboembolism infection; anticoagulants to reduce the risk of throm-
(blood clot) may lead to acute cor pulmonale. boembolism; and digitalis,oxygen,and phlebotomyto
reduce red blood cell count. A low-salt diet and restricted
fluids are often prescribed.
Causes and symptoms
Any respiratory disease or malfunction that affects Alternative treatment
the circulatory system of the lungs may lead to cor pul-
Co-management of the patient with cor pulmonale
monale. These circulatory changes cause the right ventri-
should be coordinated between the medical doctor and
cle to compensate for the extra work required to pump
the alternative practitioner. The first step in treatment is
blood through the lungs. The right ventricle has thin
to determine the cause of the condition and to evaluate
walls and is crescent-shaped. The resulting pressure
all organ systems of the body. Dietary considerations,for
causes the right ventricle to dilate and bulge,eventually
example,a low-salt diet and reduced fluid intake aimed
leading to its failure.
at reducing the edema associated with cor pulmonale,
Cor pulmonale should be expected in any patient can be supportive aspects of treatment.
with COPD and other respiratory or neuromuscular dis-
eases. Initial symptoms of cor pulmonale may actually
Prognosis
reflect those of the underlying disease. These may
The prognosis for cor pulmonale is poor,particularly
include chronic coughing,wheezing,weakness,fatigue,
because it occurs late in the process of serious disease.
and shortness of breath. Edema(abnormal buildup of
fluid),weakness,and discomfort in the upper chest may
be evident in cor pulmonale. Prevention
Cor pulmonale is best prevented by prevention of
Diagnosis COPD and other irreversible diseases that lead to heart
failure. Smokingcessation is critically important. Care-
An electrocardiograph (EKG) will show signs such
fully following the recommended course of treatment for
as frequent premature contractions in the atria or ventri-
the underlying disease may help prevent cor pulmonale.
cles. Chest x rays may show enlargement of the right
descending pulmonary artery. This sign,along with an
Resources
enlarged main pulmonary artery, indicates pulmonary
artery hypertensionin patients with COPD. Magnetic BOOKS
resonance imaging(MRI) is often the preferred method Professional Guide to Diseases.5th ed. Springhouse,PA:
of diagnosis for cor pulmonale because it can clearly Springhouse Corporation,1995.
Rothfield,Glenn S.,Suzanne Levert,and Greg Rothfield. Nat-
show and measure volume of the pulmonary arteries.
ural Medicine for Heart Disease:The Best Alternative
Other tests used to support a diagnosis of cor pulmonale
Methods for Prevention and Treatment:High Cholesterol,
may include arterial blood gas analysis, pulmonary
High Blood Pressure,Stroke,Chest.New York:Rodale
function tests,and hematocrit.
Press,1996.
ORGANIZATIONS
Treatment
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
Treatment of cor pulmonale is aimed at increasing a
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
patient’s exercisetolerance and improving oxygen levels
Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
of the arterial blood. Treatment is also aimed at the
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
underlying condition that is producing cor pulmonale.
Common treatments include antibioticsfor respiratory J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 917
Cor
pulmonale
Cori’s disease see Glycogen storage
diseases
Corkscrew esophagus see Diffuse
esophageal spasm
Corneal abrasion
Definition
A corneal abrasion is a worn or scraped-off area of
the outer,clear layer of the eye (cornea).
Description
The cornea is the clear,dome-shaped outer area of
the eye. It lies in front of the colored part of the eye (iris)
and the black hole in the iris (pupil). The outermost layer
A close-up view of an abrasion on patient’s cornea.(Photo-
of the eyeball consists of the cornea and the white part of
graph by Dennis R.Cain, CRA, Custom Medical Stock Photo.
the eye (sclera). A corneal abrasion is basically a superfi-
Reproduced by permission.)
cial cut or scrape on the cornea. A corneal abrasion is not
as serious as a corneal ulcer,which is generally deeper
usually in one week. However,to avoid a possible infec-
and more severe than an abrasion.
tion, an antibiotic eye drop may be prescribed. Some-
times additional eye drops may make the eye feel more
Causes and symptoms comfortable. Depending upon the extent of the abrasion,
some doctors may patch the affected eye. It is very
A corneal abrasion is usually the result of direct injury
important to go for the follow-up checkup to make sure
to the eye,often from a fingernail scratch,makeup brushes,
an infection does not occur. Use of contact lenses should
contact lenses,foreign body,or even twigs. Patients often
not be resumed without the doctor’s approval.
complain of feeling a foreign body in their eye,and they
may have pain,sensitivity to light,or tearing.
Prognosis
Diagnosis In typical cases,the prognosis is good. The cornea
will heal itself,usually within several days. A very deep
Ophthalmologists and optometrists, who treat eye
abrasion may lead to scarring. If the abrasion does not
disorders, are well qualified to diagnose corneal abra-
heal properly, a recurrent corneal erosion (RCE) may
sions. The doctor will check the patient’s vision (visual
result months or even years later. The symptoms are the
acuity) in both eyes with an eye chart. A patient history
same as for an abrasion (e.g.,tearing,foreign body sensa-
will also be taken, which may help to determine the
tion,and blurred vision),but it will keep occurring. Simi-
cause of the abrasion. A slit lamp,which is basically a
lar or additional treatment for the RCE may be necessary.
microscope and light source,will allow the doctor to see
the abrasion. Fluorescein,a yellow dye,may be placed
Prevention
into the eye to determine the extent of the abrasion. The
fluorescein will temporarily stain the affected area. Everyone should wear eye protection whenever this
is recommended. This should be standard practice when
using power tools and playing certain sports. Goggles
Treatment
should even be worn when mowing the lawn,because a
The cornea has a remarkable ability to heal itself,so twig can be thrown upward toward the face. Contact lens
treatment is designed to minimize complications. If the wearers should be careful to follow their doctors’instruc-
abrasion is very small,the doctor might just suggest an tions on caring for and wearing their lenses. Ill-fitting or
eye lubricant and a follow-up visit the next day. A very dirty lenses could lead to an abrasion,so patients should
small abrasion should heal in one to two days; others go for their prescribed checkups.
918 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noisarba
laenroC
Resources
BOOKS
Elkington,A. R.,and P. T. Khaw. The ABC of Eyes.2nd ed.
American College of Physicians Press,1994.
Friedlaender,Mitchell H. 20/20:A Total Guide to Improving Your
Vision and Preventing Eye Disease.Rodale Press,1991.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Family Physicians. 8880 Ward Parkway,
Kansas City,MO 64114. (816) 333-9700. <http://www.
aafp.org>.
Richard H. Lampert
Corneal infection see Keratitis
Corneal keratoplasty see Corneal
transplantation
Precautions
Corneal transplant is a very safe procedure that can
be performed on almost any patient who would benefit
from it. Any active infection or inflammation of the eye
Corneal transplantation
usually needs to be brought under control before surgery
can be performed.
Definition
In corneal transplant,also known as keratoplasty,a
Description
patient’s damaged cornea is replaced by the cornea from
the eye of a human cadaver. This is the single most com- The cornea is the transparent layer of tissue at the
mon type of human transplant surgery and has the high- very front of the eye. It is composed almost entirely of a
est success rate. Eye banks acquire and store eyes from special type of collagen. It normally contains no blood
donor individuals largely to supply the need for trans- vessels,but because it contains nerve endings,damage to
plant corneas. the cornea can be very painful.
In a corneal transplant,a disc of tissue is removed
Purpose from the center of the eye and replaced by a correspond-
ing disc from a donor eye. The circular incision is made
Corneal transplant is used when vision is lost in an
using an instrument called a trephine. In one form of
eye because the cornea has been damaged by disease or
corneal transplant (penetrating keratoplasty), the disc
traumatic injury. Some of the disease conditions that
removed is the entire thickness of the cornea and so is the
might require corneal transplant include the bulging out-
replacement disc. Over 90% of all corneal transplants in
ward of the cornea (keratoconus),a malfunction of the
the United States are of this type. In lamellar keratoplas-
inner layer of the cornea (Fuchs’dystrophy),and painful
ty,on the other hand,only the outer layer of the cornea is
swelling of the cornea (pseudophakic bullous keratopa-
removed and replaced.
thy). Some of these conditions cause cloudiness of the
cornea; others alter its natural curvature,which can also The donor cornea is attached with extremely fine
reduce the quality of vision. sutures. Surgery can be performed under anesthesia that is
confined to one area of the body while the patient is
Injury to the cornea can occur because of chemical
awake (local anesthesia) or under anesthesia that places
burns,mechanical trauma,or infection by viruses,bacte-
the entire body of the patient in a state of unconsciousness
ria,fungi,or protozoa. The herpes virus produces one of
(general anesthesia.) Surgery requires 30–90 minutes.
the more common infections leading to corneal transplant.
Over 40,000 corneal transplants are performed in the
Surgery would only be used when damage to the
United States each year. Medicare reimbursement for a
cornea is too severe to be treated with corrective lenses.
corneal transplant in one eye was about $1,200 in 1997.
Occasionally,corneal transplant is combined with other
types of eye surgery (such as cataract surgery) to solve A less common but related procedure called epiker-
multiple eye problems in one procedure. atophakia involves suturing the donor cornea directly
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 919
Corneal
transplantation
A corneal transplant in progress.(Photograph by Chet
Szymecki, Phototake NYC.Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Cadaver—The human body after death. Glaucoma—A vision defect caused when excessive
fluid pressure within the eye damages the optic
Cataract—A condition of cloudiness of the lens of
nerve.
the eye.
Cornea—The transparent layer of tissue at the very Histocompatibility antigens—Proteins scattered
front of the eye. throughout body tissues that are unique for almost
every individual.
Corticosteroids—Synthetic hormones widely used
to fight inflammation. Keratoconus—An eye condition in which the
cornea bulges outward, interfering with normal
Epikeratophakia—A procedure in which the donor
vision. Usually both eyes are affected.
cornea is attached directly onto the host cornea.
Pseudophakic bullous keratopathy—Painful
Epithelial cells—Cells that form a thin surface coat-
swelling of the cornea occasionally occurring after
ing on the outside of a body structure.
surgery to implant an artificial lens in place of a
Fibrous connective tissue—Dense tissue found in
lens affected by cataract.
various parts of the body containing very few living
cells. Retinal detachment—A serious vision disorder in
which the light-detecting layer of cells inside the
Fuchs’ dystrophy—A hereditary disease of the inner
eye (retina) is separated from its normal support tis-
layer of the cornea. Treatment requires penetrating
sue and no longer functions properly.
keratoplasty. The lens of the eye may also be affect-
ed and require surgical replacement at the same Trephine—A small surgical instrument that is rotat-
time as the cornea. ed to cut a circular incision.
onto the surface of the existing host cornea. The only tis- For the first few days after surgery,the eye may feel
sue removed from the host is the extremely thin epithe- scratchy and irritated. Vision will be somewhat blurry for
lial cell layer on the outside of the host cornea. There is as long as several months.
no permanent damage to the host cornea,and this proce-
Sutures are often left in place for six months, and
dure can be reversed. It is usually employed in children.
occasionally for as long as two years.
In adults,the use of contact lenses can usually achieve
the same goals.
Risks
Corneal transplants are highly successful,with over
Preparation
90% of operations in United States achieving restoration
No special preparation for corneal transplant is need- of sight. However,there is always some risk associated
ed. Some eye surgeons may request the patient have a com- with any surgery. Complications that can occur include
plete physical examination before surgery. The patient infection,glaucoma,retinal detachment,cataract for-
may also be asked to skip breakfast on the day of surgery. mation,and rejection of the donor cornea.
Graft rejection occurs in 5–30% of patients,a com-
plication possible with any procedure involving tissue
Aftercare
transplantation from another person (allograft). Allograft
Corneal transplant is often performed on an outpa- rejection results from a reaction of the patient’s immune
tient basis,although some patients need brief hospitaliza- system to the donor tissue. Cell surface proteins called
tion after surgery. The patient will wear an eye patch at histocompatibility antigens trigger this reaction. These
least overnight. An eye shield or glasses must be worn to antigens are often associated with vascular tissue (blood
protect the eye until the surgical wound has healed. Eye vessels) within the graft tissue. Since the cornea normal-
drops will be prescribed for the patient to use for several ly contains no blood vessels,it experiences a very low
weeks after surgery. These drops include antibioticsto rate of rejection. Generally,blood typing and tissue typ-
prevent infection as well as corticosteroids to reduce ingare not needed in corneal transplants,and no close
inflammation and prevent graft rejection. match between donor and recipient is required. Symp-
920 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitatnalpsnart
laenroC
toms of rejection include persistent discomfort,sensitivi-
ty to light,redness,or a change in vision.
If a rejection reaction does occur,it can usually be
blocked by steroid treatment. Rejection reactions may
become noticeable within weeks after surgery,but may
not occur until 10 or even 20 years after the transplant.
When full rejection does occur,the surgery will usually
need to be repeated.
Although the cornea is not normally vascular,some
corneal diseases cause vascularization (the growth of
blood vessels) into the cornea. In patients with these con-
ditions,careful testing of both donor and recipient is per-
formed just as in transplantation of other organs and tis-
sues such as hearts,kidneys,and bone marrow. In such
patients, repeated surgery is sometimes necessary in
order to achieve a successful transplant.
Cornea donors are carefully screened. Individuals injury from exposure and from foreign objects. Infection
with infectious diseases are not accepted as donors. and injury cause inflammation of the cornea—a condi-
tion called keratitis. Tissue loss because of inflamma-
tion produces an ulcer. The ulcer can either be centrally
Resources
located, thus greatly affecting vision, or peripherally
BOOKS located. There are about 30,000 cases of bacterial corneal
Boruchoff,S. Arthur,and Richard A. Thoft. “Keratoplasty: ulcers in the United States each year.
Lamellar and Penetrating.”In The Cornea,ed. Gilbert
Smolin and Richard A. Thoft. Boston:Little,Brown and
Co.,1994.
Description
Brightbill,Frederick S.,ed. Corneal Surgery.St. Louis:Mosby,
1993. The most common cause of corneal ulcers is germs,
Bruner,William E.,Walter J. Stark,and A. Edward Maumenee. but most of them cannot invade a healthy cornea with
Manual of Corneal Surgery.New York:Churchill Living- adequate tears and a functioning eyelid. They gain access
stone,1987. because injury has impaired these defense mechanisms.
General Ophthalmology.14th ed. Ed. Daniel Vaughan. Stam-
A direct injury from a foreign object inoculates germs
ford:Appleton & Lange,1995.
directly through the outer layer of the cornea,just as it
Miller,Stephen J. H. Parsons’Diseases of the Eye.18th ed.
does to the skin. A caustic chemical can inflame the
New York:Churchill Livingstone,1990.
cornea by itself or so damage it that germs can invade.
PERIODICALS Improper use of contact lenses has become a common
Watson,B. C.,and G. L. White Jr. “Corneal Transplantation.” cause of corneal injury. Eyelid or tear function failure is
American Family Physician54 (Nov. 1996):1945-1948. the other way to make the eye vulnerable to infection.
Tears and the eyelid together wash the eye and prevent
ORGANIZATIONS
foreign material from settling in. Tears contain enzymes
American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,P.O.
and other substances to help protect against infection.
Box 7424,San Francisco,CA 94120-7424. <http://www.
eyenet.org>. Certain diseases dry up tear production, leaving the
cornea dry and defenseless. Other diseases paralyze or
Victor Leipzig,PhD weaken the eyelids so that they cannot effectively protect
and cleanse the eyes.
Causes and symptoms
Corneal ulcers Viruses, bacteria, fungi, and a protozoan called
Acanthamoebacan all invade the cornea and damage it
Definition under suitable conditions.
The cornea,the clear front part of the eye through •Bacteria from a common conjunctivitis (pink eye)
which light passes,is subject to many infections and to rarely spread to the cornea,but can if untreated.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 921
Corneal
ulcers
A close-up view of an ulcer on cornea.(Custom Medical
Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Treatment
KEY TERMS
A corneal ulcer needs to be treated aggressively,as it
can result in loss of vision. The first step is to eliminate
Fluorescein—A fluorescent chemical used to
infection. Broad spectrum antibiotics will be used
examine the cornea.
before the lab results come back. Medications may then
Germ—A disease-causing microorganism. be changed to more specifically target the cause of the
infection. A combination of medications may be neces-
Inflammation—The body’s reaction to irritation.
sary. Patients should return for their follow-up visits so
Topical corticosteroids—Cortisone and related
that the doctor can monitor the healing process. The
drugs used on the skin and in the eye, usually for
cornea can heal from many insults, but if it remains
allergic conditions.
scarred,corneal transplantationmay be necessary to
restore vision. If the corneal ulcer is large,hospitaliza-
tion may be necessary.
•Fecal bacteria are more likely to be able to infect the
cornea. Prognosis
•A bacterium called Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which Treated early enough,corneal infections will usually
can contaminate eyedrops,is particularly able to cause resolve,perhaps even without the formation of an ulcer.
corneal infection. However,left untreated,infections can lead to ulcers and
the corneal ulcer can result in scarring or perforation of
•A group of incomplete bacteria known as Chlamydia
the cornea. Other problems may occur as well,including
can be transmitted to the eye directly by flies or dirty
glaucoma. Patients with certain systemic diseases that
hands. One form of chlamydial infection is the leading
impede healing (such as diabetes mellitusor rheuma-
cause of blindness in developing countries and is known
toid arthritis) may need more aggressive treatment. The
as Egyptian ophthalmia or trachoma. Another type of
later the treatment,the more damage will be done and the
Chlamydiacauses a sexually transmitted disease.
more scarring will result. Corneal transplant is standard
•Other sexually transmitted diseases—for example, treatment with a high probability of success.
syphilis—can affect the cornea.
The most common viruses to damage the cornea are
Prevention
adenoviruses and herpes viruses. Viral and fungal infec-
tions are often caused by improper use of topical corti- Attentive care of contact lenses will greatly reduce
costeroids. If topical corticosteroids are used in a patient the incidence of corneal damage and ulceration. Germs
with herpes simplex keratitis, the ulcer can get much that cause no problems in the mouth or on the hands can
worse and blindness could result. damage the eye,so contact lens wearers must wash their
hands before touching their lenses and must not use sali-
Symptoms are obvious. The cornea is intensely sen-
va to moisten them. Tap water should not be used to rinse
sitive,so corneal ulcers normally produce severe pain. If
the lenses. Contacts should be removed whenever there
the corneal ulcer is centrally located,vision is impaired
is irritation and left out until the eyes are back to normal.
or completely absent. Tearing is present and the eye is
It is not advisable to wear contact lenses while swim-
red. It hurts to look at bright lights.
ming or in hot tubs. Daily wear contact lenses have been
found to be less of a risk than contacts for overnight wear
Diagnosis (extended wear). Organisms have been cultured from
contact lens cases,so the cases should be rinsed in hot
The doctor will take a case history to try to deter-
water and allowed to air dry. Cases should be replaced
mine the cause of the ulcer. This can include improper
every three months. Patients should follow their doctors’
use of contact lenses; injury, such as a scratch from a
schedules for replacement of the contacts.
twig; or severe dry eye. An instrument called a slit lamp
will be used to examine the cornea. The slit lamp is a Eye protection in the workplace, or wherever tiny
microscope with a light source that magnifies the cornea, particles are flying around,is essential. Ultraviolet (UV)
allowing the extent of the ulcer to be seen. Fluorescein,a coatings on glasses or sunglasses can help protect the
yellow dye,may be used to illuminate further detail. If a eyes from the sun’s rays. Goggles with UV protection
germ is responsible for the ulcer, identification may should be worn when skiing or in suntanning salons to
require scraping samples directly from the cornea,con- protect against UV rays. Prompt attention to any red eye
junctiva,and lids,and sending them to the laboratory. should prevent progressive damage.
922 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sreclu
laenroC
For people with inadequate tears, use of artificial
tears eyedrops will prevent damage from drying. Eyelids
that do not close adequately may temporarily have to be
sewn shut to protect the eye until more lasting treatment
can be instituted.
Resources
BOOKS
Newell,Frank W. “Ulcerative Keratitis.”In Ophthalmology:
Principles and Concepts.8th ed. St. Louis:Mosby,1996.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,P.O.
Box 7424,San Francisco,CA 94120-7424. <http://www.
eyenet.org>.
American Optometric Association. 243 North Lindbergh Blvd.,
St. Louis,MO 63141. (314) 991-4100. <http://www.
aoanet.org>.
Prevent Blindness America. 500 East Remington Road,
Schaumburg,IL 60173. (800) 331-2020. <http://www.
preventblindness.org>.
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
Types of corns
A hard corn is a compact lump with a thick core.
Hard corns usually form on the tops of the toes,on the
Corns and calluses
outside of the little toe,or on the sole of the foot.
Definition A soft corn is a small,inflamed patch of skin with a
smooth center. Soft corns usually appear between the toes.
A corn is a small,painful,raised bump on the outer
skin layer. A callus is a rough,thickened patch of skin. A seed corn is the least common type of corn.
Occurring only on the heel or ball of the foot,a seed corn
consists of a circle of stiff skin surrounding a plug of
Description
cholesterol.
Corns and calluses are one of the three major foot
problems in the United States. The other two are foot
Types of calluses
infections and toenail problems. Corns and calluses
affect about 5% of the population. A plantar callus,a callus that occurs on the sole of
the foot,has a white center. Hereditary calluses develop
Corns usually appear on non-weight-bearing areas
where there is no apparent friction,run in families,and
like the outside of the little toe or the tops of other toes.
occur most often in children.
Women have corns more often than men, probably
because women wear high-heeled shoes and other shoes
that do not fit properly. Corns have hard cores shaped
Causes and symptoms
like inverted pyramids. Sharp pain occurs whenever
downward pressure is applied, and a dull ache may be Corns and calluses form to prevent injury to skin
felt at other times. that is repeatedly pinched,rubbed,or irritated. The most
common causes are:
Calluses occur most often on the heels and balls of
the feet,the knees,and the palms of the hands. However, •shoes that are too tight or too loose,or have very high
they can develop on any part of the body that is subject to heels
repeated pressure or irritation. Calluses are usually more
•tight socks or stockings
than an inch wide—larger than corns. They generally
don’t hurt unless pressure is applied. •deformed toes
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 923
Corns
and
calluses
Corns on toes.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by
permission.)
It is important to see a doctor if the skin of a corn or
KEY TERMS callus is cut,because it may become infected. If a corn
discharges pus or clear fluid, it is infected. A family
Ayurveda—Ayurveda is a system of wholistic physician,podiatrist,or orthopedist may:
medicine from India that aims to bring the individ- •remove (debride) affected layers of skin
ual into harmony with nature. It provides guid-
•prescribe oral antibioticsto eliminate infection
ance regarding food and lifestyle, so that healthy
people can stay healthy and people with health •drain pus from infected corns
challenges can improve their health. •inject cortisone into the affected area to decrease pain
Bursitis—Inflammation of a bursa, a fluid-filled or inflammation
cavity or sac. In the body, bursae are located at •perform surgery to correct toe deformities or remove
places where friction might otherwise develop. bits of bone
Alternative treatment
•walking down a long hill,or standing or walking on a Standing and walking correctly can sometimes elim-
hard surface for a long time inate excess foot pressure. Several types of bodywork
can help correct body imbalances. Bodywork is a term
Jobs or hobbies that cause steady or recurring pres-
used for any of a number of systems,including Aston-
sure on the same spot can also cause calluses.
Patterning,the Feldenkrais method,and rolfing,that
Symptoms include hard growths on the skin in manipulate the body through massage,movement educa-
response to direct pressure. Corns may be extremely sore tion,or meditational techniques.
and surrounded by inflamed,swollen skin.
Aloe (Aloe barbadensis) cream is an effective skin
softener,and two or three daily applications of calendu-
Diagnosis la (Calendula officinalis) salve can soften skin and pre-
vent inflammation. One teaspoon of lemon juice mixed
Corns can be recognized on sight. A family physi-
with one teaspoon of dried chamomile (Martricaria
cian or podiatrist may scrape skin off what seems to be a
recutita) tea and one crushed garlic clove dissolves
callus,but may actually be a wart. If the lesion is a wart,
thickened skin.
it will bleed. A callus will not bleed, but will reveal
another layer of dead skin. An ayurvedic practitioner may recommend the fol-
lowing treatment:
Treatment •apply each day a paste made by combining one tea-
spoon of aloe vera gel with half that amount of turmeric
Corns and calluses do not usually require medical
(Circuma longa)
attention unless the person who has them has diabetes
mellitus,poor circulation,or other problems that make •bandage overnight
self-care difficult. •soak in warm water for 10 minutes every morning
Treatment should begin as soon as an abnormality •massage gently with mustard (Brassica cruciferae) oil
appears. The first step is to identify and eliminate the
source of pressure. Placing moleskin pads over corns can
Prognosis
relieve pressure,and large wads of cotton,lamb’s wool,
or moleskin can cushion calluses. Most corns and calluses disappear about three weeks
after the pressure that caused them is eliminated. They
Using hydrocortisone creams or soaking feet in a
are apt to recur if the pressure returns.
solution of Epsom salts and very warm water for at least
five minutes a day before rubbing the area with a pumice Extreme pain can change the way a person stands or
stone will remove part or all of some calluses. Rubbing walks. Such changes can,in turn,cause pain in the ankle,
corns just makes them hurt more. back,hip,or knee.
Applying petroleum jelly or lanolin-enriched hand Bursitis, a painful, inflamed fluid-filled sac, can
lotion helps keep skin soft,but corn-removing ointments develop beneath a corn. An ulcer or broken area within a
that contain acid can damage healthy skin. They should corn can reach to the bone. Infection can have serious
never be used by pregnant women or by people who are consequences for people who have diabetes or poor cir-
diabetic or who have poor circulation. culation.
924 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sesullac
dna
snroC
Prevention ation) is performed to restore blood flow to the heart.
This relieves chest pain and ischemia, improves the
Corns and calluses can usually be prevented by avoid-
patient’s quality of life,and in some cases,prolongs the
ing friction-causing activities and wearing shoes that fit
patient’s life. The goals of the procedure are to enable the
properly, are activity-appropriate, and are kept in good
patient to resume a normal lifestyle and to lower the risk
repair. Soles and heels that wear unevenly may indicate a
of a heart attack.
need for corrective footwear or special insoles. Socks and
stockings should not cramp the toes. Gloves,kneepads, The decision to perform coronary artery bypass graft
and other protective gear should also be worn as needed. surgery is a complex one,and there is some disagreement
among experts as to when it is indicated. Many experts
Feet should be measured,while standing,whenever
feel that it has been performed too frequently in the Unit-
buying new shoes. It is best to shop for shoes late in the
ed States. According to the American Heart Association, day,when feet are likely to be swollen. It is also impor-
appropriate candidates for coronary artery bypass graft
tant to buy shoes with toe-wiggling room and to try new
surgery include patients with blockages in at least three
shoes on both feet.
major coronary arteries,especially if the blockages are in
arteries that feed the heart’s left ventricle; patients with
Resources
angina so severe that even mild exertion causes chest
BOOKS pain; and patients who cannot tolerate percutaneous trans-
The Editors of Time-Life Books. The Medical Advisor:The luminal coronary angioplastyand do not respond well to
Complete Guide to Alternative and Conventional Treat- drug therapy. It is well accepted that coronary artery
ments.Alexandria,VA:Time Life,Inc.,1996. bypass graft surgery is the treatment of choice for patients
New Choices in Natural Healing.Ed. Bill Gottlieb,et al. with severe coronary artery disease(three or more dis-
Emmaus,PA:Rodale Press,1995.
eased arteries with impaired function in the left ventricle).
ORGANIZATIONS
American Podiatric Medical Association. 9312 Old George-
Precautions
town Road,Bethesda,MD 20814-1698. (301) 571-9200.
<http://www.apma.org>.
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery should ideally
OTHER be postponed for three months after a heart attack. Patients
“Corn or Callus.”ThriveOnline.20 Apr. 1998 <http://thrive should be medically stable before the surgery,if possible.
online.oxygen.com>.
“Corns/Calluses.”YourHealth.com.20 Apr. 1998 <http://www.
yourhealth.com>. Description
“Foot Disorders.”Foot Talk Home Page.<http://www.foottalk.
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery builds a detour
com/corns.htm>.
around one or more blocked coronary arteries with a
“Foot Facts.”American Podiatric Medical Association.20 Apr.
graft from a healthy vein or artery. The graft goes around
1998 <http://www.apma.org>.
the clogged artery (or arteries) to create new pathways
Maureen Haggerty for oxygen-rich blood to flow to the heart.
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery is major surgery
performed in a hospital. The length of the procedure
depends upon the number of arteries being bypassed,but it
Coronary artery bypass graft
generally takes from four to six hours—sometimes longer.
surgery
The average hospital stay is four to seven days. Full recov-
ery from coronary artery bypass graft surgery takes three to
Definition
four months. Within four to six weeks,people with seden-
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery is a surgical tary office jobs can return to work; people with physical
procedure in which one or more blocked coronary arter- jobs must wait longer and sometimes change careers.
ies are bypassed by a blood vessel graft to restore normal
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery is widely per-
blood flow to the heart. These grafts usually come from
formed in the United States. The American Heart Associ-
the patient’s own arteries and veins located in the leg,
ation estimates that 573,000 coronary artery bypass graft
arm,or chest.
surgeries were performed on 363,000 patients in 1995.
Seventy-four percent of these procedures were per-
Purpose
formed on men and 44% on men and women under the
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery (also called age of 65 (1995 data). The estimated average cost of this
coronary artery bypass surgery,CABG,and bypass oper- procedure in 1995 was $44,820.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 925
Coronary
artery
bypass
graft
surgery
Procedure ed through this opening once the graft is sewn in place. If a
leg vein is used, one end is connected to the coronary
The surgery team for coronary artery bypass graft
artery and the other to the aorta. If a mammary artery is
surgery includes the cardiovascular surgeon,assisting sur-
used,one end is connected to the coronary artery while the
geons,a cardiovascular anesthesiologist,a perfusion tech-
other remains attached to the aorta. The procedure is
nologist (who operates the heart-lung machine),and spe-
repeated on as many coronary arteries as necessary. Most
cially trained nurses. After general anesthesia is adminis-
patients who have coronary artery bypass graft surgery
tered,the surgeon removes the veins or prepares the arter-
have at least three grafts done during the procedure.
ies for grafting. If the saphenous vein is to be used,a series
of incisions are made in the patient’s thigh or calf. More Electric shocks start the heart pumping again after
commonly,a segment of the internal mammary artery will the grafts have been completed. The heart-lung machine
be used and the incisions are made in the chest wall. The is turned off and the blood slowly returns to normal body
surgeon then makes an incision from the patient’s neck to temperature. After implanting pacing electrodes (if need-
navel, saws through the breastbone, and retracts the rib ed) and inserting a chest tube, the surgeon closes the
cage open to expose the heart. The patient is connected to chest cavity.
a heart-lung machine, also called a cardiopulmonary
bypass pump,that cools the body to reduce the need for
Success rate of coronary artery bypass graft surgery
oxygen and takes over for the heart and lungs during the
procedure. The heart is then stopped and a cold solution of About 90% of patients experience significant improve-
potassium-enriched normal saline is injected into the aor- ments after coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Patients
tic root and the coronary arteries to lower the temperature experience full relief from chest pain and resume their nor-
of the heart,which prevents damage to the tissue. mal activities in about 70% of the cases; the remaining
20% experience partial relief. In 5–10% of coronary artery
Next,a small opening is made just below the block- bypass graft surgeries, the bypass graft stops supplying
age in the diseased coronary artery. Blood will be redirect- blood to the bypassed artery within one year. Younger peo-
926 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yregrus
tfarg
ssapyb
yretra
yranoroC
Aorta Mammary artery Aorta
(from chest)
Saphenous vein
Blocked
coronary
Blocked
coronary
Coronary bypass using Coronary bypass using
the mammary artery the saphenous vein
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery builds a detour around one or more blocked coronary arteries with a graft from a
healthy vein or artery.The graft goes around the clogged artery (or arteries) to create new pathways for oxygen-rich blood to
flow to the heart.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
ple who are healthy except for the heart disease do well bypass and minimally invasive coronary artery bypass are
with bypass surgery. Patients who have poorer results from both less than 3%—about the same as in standard coronary
coronary artery bypass graft surgery include those over the artery bypass graft surgery. One clinical trial indicated that
age of 70,those who have poor left ventricular function,or survival at seven years was the same in minimally invasive
are undergoing a repeat surgery or other procedures con- coronary artery bypass and standard coronary artery bypass
currently,and those who continue smoking,do not treat graft surgery,but that another intervention was necessary
high cholesterol or other coronary risk factors, or have five times more often with minimally invasive coronary
another debilitating disease. artery bypass than with standard coronary artery bypass
graft surgery. The American Heart Association Council on
Long term,symptoms recur in only about 3–4% of
Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Surgery feels that both pro-
patients per year. Five years after coronary artery bypass
cedures appear promising but that further study is needed.
graft surgery,survival expectancy is 90%,at 10 years it is
More data covering longer term outcomes are necessary in
about 80%,at 15 years it is about 55%,and at 20 years it
order to fully assess these procedures.
is about 40%.
Angina recurs in about 40% of patients after about
Preparation
10 years. In most cases,it is less severe than before the
surgery and can be controlled by drug therapy. In patients The patient is usually admitted to the hospital the
who have had vein grafts,40% of the grafts are severely day before the coronary artery bypass graft surgery is
obstructed 10 years after the procedure. Repeat coronary scheduled. Coronary angiographyhas been previously
artery bypass graft surgery may be necessary,and is usu- performed to show the surgeon where the arteries are
ally less successful than the first surgery. blocked and where the grafts might best be positioned.
The patient is given a blood-thinning drug—usually
Minimally invasive coronary artery bypass graft heparin—that helps to prevent blood clots. The evening
surgery before the surgery, the patient showers with antiseptic
soap and is shaved from chin to toes. After midnight,
There are two new types of minimally invasive coro-
food and fluids are restricted. A sedative is prescribed on
nary artery bypass graft surgery: port-access coronary
the morning of surgery and sometimes the night before.
artery bypass (also called PACAB or PortCAB) and min-
Heart monitoring begins.
imally invasive coronary artery bypass (also called MID-
CAB). These procedures are minimally invasive because
they do not require the neck-to-navel incision, sawing Aftercare
through the breastbone,or opening the rib cage to expose
The patient recovers in a surgical intensive care unit
the heart. Both procedures enable surgeons to work on
for at least the first two days after the surgery. He or she is
the coronary arteries through small chest holes called
connected to chest and breathing tubes,a mechanical venti-
ports and other small incisions. Port-access coronary
lator,a heart monitor and other monitoring equipment,and
artery bypass requires the use of a heart-lung machine
a urinary catheter. The breathing tube and ventilator are
but minimally invasive coronary artery bypass does not.
usually removed within six hours of surgery,but the other
Advantages of these procedures over standard coronary
tubes remain in place as long as the patient is in the inten-
artery bypass graft surgery include a shorter hospital
sive care unit. Drugs are prescribed to control pain and to
stay,a shorter recovery period,and lower costs.
prevent unwanted blood clotting. The patient is closely
Port-access coronary artery bypass enables surgeons monitored. Vital signs and other parameters,such as heart
to perform bypasses through smaller incisions. Using a sounds and oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in arterial
video monitor to view the procedure,the surgeon passes blood,are checked frequently. The chest tube is checked to
instruments through ports in the patient’s chest to per- ensure that it is draining properly. The patient is fed intra-
form the bypass. Mammary arteries or leg veins are used venously for the first day or two. Daily doses of aspirinare
for the grafts. Minimally invasive coronary artery bypass started within six to 24 hours after the procedure. Chest
is performed on a beating heart and is appropriate only physiotherapy is started after the ventilator and breathing
for bypasses of one or two arteries. Small ports are made tube are removed. The therapy includes coughing,turning
in the patient’s chest,along with a small incision directly frequently,and taking deep breaths. Other exercises will be
over the coronary artery to be bypassed. Generally,the encouraged to improve the patient’s circulation and prevent
surgeon uses a mammary artery for the bypass. complications due to prolonged bed rest.
Early data on outcomes for port-access coronary artery If there are no complications, the patient begins to
bypass and minimally invasive coronary artery bypass are resume a normal routine around the second day. This
favorable. Mortality rates with port-access coronary artery includes eating regular food, sitting up, and walking
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 927
Coronary
artery
bypass
graft
surgery
coronary artery bypass graft surgery is two to three per-
KEY TERMS cent. Possible complications include graft closure and
development of blockages in other arteries, long-term
Aorta—The main artery which carries blood from development of atherosclerotic disease of saphenous vein
the heart to the rest of the body The aorta is the grafts,abnormal heart rhythms,high or low blood pres-
largest artery in the body. sure,blood clots that can lead to a strokeor heart attack,
infections,and depression. There is a higher risk for com-
Graft—To implant living tissue surgically. In coro-
plications in patients who are heavy smokers, patients
nary artery bypass graft surgery, healthy veins or
who have serious lung,kidney,or metabolic problems,or
arteries are grafted to coronary arteries.
patients who have a reduced supply of blood to the brain.
Mammary artery—A chest wall artery that
descends from the aorta and is commonly used for
Resources
bypass grafts.
BOOKS
Saphenous vein—A long vein in the thigh or calf
American Heart Association. “Considering Surgery or Other
commonly used for bypass grafts.
Interventions.”In Guide to Heart Attack Treatment,
Ventricles—The left and right ventricles are the Recovery,Prevention.New York:Time Books,1996.
large chambers of the heart. The ventricles propel DeBakey,Michael E.,and Antonio M. Gotto Jr. “Surgical Treat-
blood to the lungs and the rest of the body. ment of Coronary Artery Disease.”In The New Living
Heart.Holbrook,MA:Adams Media Corporation,1997.
Texas Heart Institute. “Heart Surgery.”In Texas Heart Institute
Heart Owners Handbook.New York:John Wiley & Sons,
1996.
around a little bit. Before being released from the hospi-
tal,the patient usually spends a few days under observa- PERIODICALS
tion in a non-surgical unit. During this time,counseling is Bauman,Alisa. “Too Many Bypasses?”Men’s Health78 (Mar.
usually provided on eating right and starting a light exer- 1998):80-81.
ciseprogram to keep the heart healthy. Patients should eat Faxon,David P. “Myocardial Revascularization in 1997:
Angioplasty Versus Bypass Surgery.”American Family
a lot of fruits,vegetables,grains,and non-fat or low-fat
Physician(1 Oct. 1997):1409-1417.
dairy products, and reduce fats to less than 30% of all
Hicks Jr.,George L. “Cardiac Surgery.”Journal of the Ameri-
calories. An exercise program will usually be tailored for
can College of Surgeons186,no. 2 (Feb. 1998):129-132.
the patient, who will be encouraged to participate in a
Smith,Laquita Bowen. “Not-So-Open Heart Surgery:New
cardiac rehabilitationprogram where exercise will be Equipment Allows for a Three-Inch Incision.”Memphis
supervised by professionals. Cardiac rehabilitationpro- Business Journal18,no. 53 (12 May 1997):49.
grams,offered by hospitals and other organizations,may Solomon,Allen J.,and Bernard J. Gersh. “Management of
also include classes on heart-healthy living. Chronic Stable Angina:Medical Therapy,Percutaneous
Transluminal Coronary Angioplasty,and Coronary Artery
Full recovery from coronary artery bypass graft
Bypass Graft Surgery.”Annals of Internal Medicine128
surgery takes three to four months and is a gradual
(1 Feb. 1998):216-223.
process. Upon release from the hospital,the patient will
feel weak because of the extended bed rest in the hospi- ORGANIZATIONS
tal. Within a few weeks,the patient should begin to feel American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
stronger. 75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
Texas Heart Institute. Heart Information Service. P.O. Box 20345,
While the incision scar from coronary artery bypass
Houston,TX 77225-0345. <http://www.tmc.edu/thi>.
graft surgery heals, which takes one to two months, it
may be sore. The scar should not be bumped,scratched, Lori De Milto
or otherwise disturbed. An exercise test is often conduct-
ed after the patient leaves the hospital to determine how
effective the surgery was and to confirm that progressive
exercise is safe.
Coronary artery disease
Risks
Definition
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery is major surgery
and patients may experience any of the complications Coronary artery disease is a narrowing or blockage
associated with major surgery. The risk of deathduring of the arteries and vessels that provide oxygen and nutri-
928 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
yretra
yranoroC
ents to the heart. It is caused by atherosclerosis,an accu- A number of major contributing factors increase the
mulation of fatty materials on the inner linings of arter- risk of developing coronary artery disease. Some of these
ies. The resulting blockage restricts blood flow to the can be changed and some cannot. People with more risk
heart. When the blood flow is completely cut off, the factors are more likely to develop coronary artery disease.
result is a heart attack.
Major risk factors
Description Major risk factors significantly increase the chance
of developing coronary artery disease. Those that cannot
Coronary artery disease,also called coronary heart
be changed are:
disease or heart disease,is the leading cause of deathfor
both men and women in the United States. According to •Heredity—People whose parents have coronary artery
the American Heart Association,in 1995 one in every 4.8 disease are more likely to develop it. African-Ameri-
deaths in the United States was caused by coronary artery cans are also at increased risk because they experience
disease. About every 29 seconds,one American will have a higher rate of severe hypertensionthan whites do.
a heart attack; about every minute,one American will die •Sex—Men are more likely to have heart attacks than
from a heart attack. Fourteen million Americans have women are and to have them at a younger age. Over age
active symptoms of coronary artery disease (heart attack 60,however,women have coronary artery disease at a
or chest pains). Many millions more have silent coronary rate equal to that of men.
disease,the first indication of which can be sudden death.
•Age—Men who are 45 years of age and older and
Coronary artery disease occurs when the coronary women who are 55 years of age and older are more
arteries become partially blocked or clogged. This block- likely to have coronary artery disease. Occasionally,
age limits the flow of blood from the coronary arteries, coronary disease may strike a person in the 30s. Older
which are the major arteries supplying oxygen-rich blood people (those over 65) are more likely to die of a heart
to the heart. The coronary arteries expand when the heart attack. Older women are twice as likely as older men to
is working harder and needs more oxygen. Arteries die within a few weeks of a heart attack.
would expand,for example,when a person is climbing
Major risk factors that can be changed are:
stairs,exercising,or having sex. If the arteries are unable
to expand,the heart is deprived of oxygen (myocardial •Smoking—Smoking increases both the chance of
ischemia). When the blockage is limited,chest painor developing coronary artery disease and the chance of
pressure,called angina,may occur. When the blockage dying from it. Smokers are two to four times more like-
cuts off the flow of blood, the result is heart attack ly than are non-smokers to die of sudden heart attack.
(myocardial infarction or heart muscle death). They are more than twice as likely as non-smokers to
have a heart attack. They are also more likely to die
Healthy coronary arteries are clean, smooth, and
within an hour of a heart attack. Second hand smoke
slick. The artery walls are flexible and can expand to let
may also increase risk.
more blood through when the heart needs to work harder.
The disease process in arteries is thought to begin with •High cholesterol—Dietary sources of cholesterol are
an injury to the linings and walls of the arteries. This meat,eggs,and other animal products. The body also
injury makes them susceptible to atherosclerosis and produces it. Age, sex, heredity, and diet affect one’s
blood clots (thrombosis). blood cholesterol. Total blood cholesterol is considered
high at levels above 240 mg/dL and borderline at 200-
239 mg/dL. High-risk levels of low-density lipoprotein
Causes and symptoms (LDL cholesterol) begin at 130–159 mg/dL,depending
on other risk factors. Risk of developing coronary
Coronary artery disease is usually caused by athero-
artery disease increases steadily as blood cholesterol
sclerosis. Cholesterol and other fatty substances accumu-
levels increase above 160 mg/dL. When a person has
late on the inner wall of the arteries. They attract fibrous
other risk factors,the risk multiplies.
tissue,blood components,and calcium and harden into
artery-clogging plaques. Atherosclerotic plaques often •High blood pressure—High blood pressure makes the
form blood clots that can also block the coronary arteries heart work harder and weakens it over time. It increases
(coronary thrombosis). Congenital defects and muscle the risk of heart attack,stroke,kidney failure,and con-
spasms can also block blood flow. Recent research indi- gestive heart failure. A blood pressure of 140 over 90
cates that infection from organisms such as chlamydia or above is considered high. As the numbers rise,high
bacteria may be responsible for some cases of coronary blood pressure goes from Stage 1 (mild) to Stage 4
artery disease. (very severe). In combination with obesity,smoking,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 929
Coronary
artery
disease
high cholesterol,or diabetes,high blood pressure rais- An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows the heart’s
es the risk of heart attack or stroke several times. activity and may reveal a lack of oxygen (ischemia).
Electrodes covered with conducting jelly are placed on
•Lack of physical activity—Lack of exerciseincreases
the patient’s chest,arms,and legs. They send impulses of
the risk of coronary artery disease. Even modest physi-
the heart’s activity through an oscilloscope (a monitor) to
cal activity,like walking,is beneficial if done regularly.
a recorder that traces them on paper. The test takes about
•Diabetes mellitus—The risk of developing coronary 10 minutes and is performed in a physician’s office. A
artery disease is seriously increased for diabetics. More definite diagnosis cannot be made from electrocardiog-
than 80% of diabetics die of some type of heart or raphy. About 50% of patients with significant coronary
blood vessel disease. artery disease have normal resting electrocardiograms.
Another type of electrocardiogram,known as the exer-
Contributing risk factors cise stress test,measures how the heart and blood ves-
sels respond to exertion when the patient is exercising on
Contributing risk factors have been linked to coro-
a treadmill or a stationary bike. This test is performed in
nary artery disease,but their significance is not known
a physician’s office or an exercise laboratory. It takes
yet. Contributing risk factors are:
15–30 minutes. It is not perfectly accurate. It sometimes
•Obesity—Excess weight increases the strain on the gives a normal reading when the patient has a heart prob-
heart and increases the risk of developing coronary lem or an abnormal reading when the patient does not.
artery disease even if no other risk factors are present.
If the electrocardiogram reveals a problem or is
Obesity increases blood pressure and blood cholesterol
inconclusive,the next step is exercise echocardiography
and can lead to diabetes.
or nuclear scanning (angiography). Echocardiography,
•Stressand anger—Some scientists believe that stress cardiac ultrasound,uses sound waves to create an image
and anger can contribute to the development of coro- of the heart’s chambers and valves. A technician applies
nary artery disease and increase the blood’s tendency to gel to a hand-held transducer,then presses it against the
form clots (thrombosis). Stress,the mental and physical patient’s chest. The heart’s sound waves are converted
reaction to life’s irritations and challenges, increases into an image that can be displayed on a monitor. It does
the heart rate and blood pressure and can injure the lin- not reveal the coronary arteries themselves, but can
ing of the arteries. Evidence shows that anger increases detect abnormalities in heart wall motion caused by coro-
the risk of dying from heart disease. The risk of heart nary disease. Performed in a cardiology outpatient diag-
attack is more than double after an episode of anger. nostic laboratory,the test takes 30–60 minutes.
Chest pain (angina) is the main symptom of coro- Radionuclide angiography enables physicians to see
nary heart disease but it is not always present. Other the blood flow of the coronary arteries. Nuclear scans are
symptoms include shortness of breath,chest heaviness, performed by injecting a small amount of radiopharma-
tightness,pain,a burning sensation,squeezing,or pres- ceutical such as thallium into the bloodstream. A device
sure either behind the breastbone or in the arms,neck,or that uses gamma rays to produce an image of the radioac-
jaws. Many people have no symptoms of coronary artery tive material (gamma camera) records pictures of the
disease before having a heart attack; 63% of women and heart. Radionuclide scans are not dangerous. The radia-
48% of men who died suddenly of coronary artery dis- tion exposure is about the same as that in a chest x ray.
ease had no previous symptoms of the disease,according The tiny amount of radioactive material used disappears
to the American Heart Association. from the body in a few days. Radionuclide scans cost
about four times as much as exercise stress tests but pro-
vide more information.
Diagnosis
In radionuclide angiography, a scanning camera
Diagnosis begins with a visit to the physician,who passes back and forth over the patient who lies on a table.
will take a medical history,discuss symptoms,listen to Radionuclide angiography is usually performed in a hos-
the heart,and perform basic screening tests. These tests pital’s nuclear medicine department and takes 30–60
will measure weight,blood pressure,blood lipid levels, minutes. Thallium scanning is usually done in conjunc-
and fastingblood glucose levels. Other diagnostic tests tion with an exercise stress test. When the stress test is
include resting and exercise electrocardiogram,echocar- finished, thallium or sestamibi is injected. The patient
diography,radionuclide scans,and coronary angiogra- resumes exercise for one minute to absorb the thallium.
phy. The treadmill exercise (stress) test is an appropriate For patients who cannot exercise,cardiac blood flow and
screening test for those with high risk factors even when heart rate may be increased by intravenous dipyridamole
they feel well. (Persantine) or adenosine. Thallium scanning is done
930 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
yretra
yranoroC
twice,immediately after injecting the radiopharmaceuti-
cal and again four hours (and maybe 24 hours) later. It is KEY TERMS
usually performed in a hospital’s nuclear medicine
department. Each scan takes 30–60 minutes. Atherosclerosis—A process in which the walls of
Coronary angiography is the most accurate method the coronary arteries thicken due to the accumula-
for making a diagnosis of coronary artery disease,but it tion of plaque in the blood vessels. Atherosclerosis
is also the most invasive. It is a form of cardiac is the cause of coronary artery disease.
catheterizationthat shows the heart’s chambers,great Angina—Chest pain that happens when diseased
vessels, and coronary arteries using x-ray technology. blood vessels restrict the flow of blood to the
During coronary angiography the patient is awake but heart. Angina is often the first symptom of coro-
sedated. ECG electrodes are placed on the patient’s chest nary artery disease.
and an intravenous line is inserted. A local anesthetic is
Beta-blocker—A drug that blocks some of the
injected into the site where the catheter will be inserted.
effects of fight-or-flight hormone adrenaline (epi-
The cardiologist inserts a catheter into a blood vessel and
nephrine and norepinephrine), slowing the heart
guides it into the heart. A contrast dye is injected to make
rate and lowering the blood pressure.
the heart visible on x-ray cinematography. Coronary
angiography is performed in a cardiac catheterization Calcium-channel blocker—A drug that blocks the
laboratory either in an outpatient or inpatient surgery entry of calcium into the muscle cells of small
unit. It takes from 30 minutes to two hours. blood vessels (arterioles) and keeps them from
narrowing.
Coronary arteries—The main arteries that provide
Treatment
blood to the heart. The coronary arteries surround
Coronary artery disease can be treated many ways. the heart like a crown, coming out of the aorta,
The choice of treatment depends on the severity of the arching down over the top of the heart, and divid-
disease. Treatments include lifestyle changes and drug ing into two branches. These are the arteries in
therapy,percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplas- which coronary artery disease occurs.
ty,and coronary artery bypass surgery. Coronary artery HDL cholesterol—High-density lipoprotein cho-
disease is a chronic disease requiring lifelong care. lesterol is a component of cholesterol that helps
Angioplasty or bypass surgery is not a “cure.” protect against heart disease. HDL is nicknamed
“good” cholesterol
People with less severe coronary artery disease may
gain adequate control through lifestyle changes and drug LDL Cholesterol—Low-density lipoprotein choles-
therapy. Many of the lifestyle changes that prevent dis- terol is the primary cholesterol molecule. High
ease progression—a low-fat,low-cholesterol diet,weight levels of LDL increase the risk of coronary heart
loss if needed,exercise,and not smoking—also help pre- disease. LDL is nicknamed “bad” cholesterol.
vent the disease from developing. These lifestyle changes
Plaque—A deposit of fatty and other substances
are discussed in more detail under prevention.
that accumulate in the lining of the artery wall.
Drugs such as nitrates,beta-blockers,and calcium- Triglyceride—A fat that comes from food or is
channel blockers relieve chest pain and complications of made from other energy sources in the body. Ele-
coronary artery disease, but they cannot clear blocked vated triglyceride levels contribute to the develop-
arteries. Nitrates (nitroglycerin) improve blood flow to ment of atherosclerosis.
the heart. Beta-blockers (acebutelol,propranolol) reduce
the amount of oxygen required by the heart during stress.
One type of calcium-channel blocker (verapamil,dilti-
azem hydrochloride) helps keep the arteries open and
usually called coronary angioplasty, is a non-surgical
reduces blood pressure. Aspirin helps prevent blood
procedure. A catheter tipped with a balloon is threaded
clots from forming on plaques,reducing the likelihood of
from a blood vessel in the thigh into the blocked artery.
a heart attack. Cholesterol-lowering medications are also
The balloon is inflated, compressing the plaque to
indicated in most cases.
enlarge the blood vessel and open the blocked artery. The
Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty and balloon is deflated,and the catheter is removed. Coro-
bypass surgery are procedures that enter the body (inva- nary angioplasty is performed by a cardiologist in a hos-
sive procedures) to improve blood flow in the coronary pital and generally requires a stay of one or two days.
arteries. Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, Coronary angioplasty is successful about 90% of the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 931
Coronary
artery
disease
time, but for one-third of patients the artery narrows magnesium; B-complex vitamins; the anti-oxidant vita-
again within six months. The procedure can be repeated. mins C and E; selenium; and zinc. Traditional Chinese
It is less invasive and less expensive than coronary artery medicine may recommend herbal remedies, massage,
bypass surgery. acupuncture,and dietary modification.
In coronary artery bypass surgery,a healthy artery or
vein from an arm, leg, or chest wall is used to build a Prognosis
detour around the coronary artery blockage. The healthy
In many cases,coronary artery disease can be suc-
vessel then supplies oxygen-rich blood to the heart.
cessfully treated. Advances in medicine and healthier
Bypass surgery is major surgery. It is appropriate for
lifestyles have caused a substantial decline in death rates
those patients with blockages in two or three major coro-
from coronary artery disease since the mid-1980s. New
nary arteries, those with severely narrowed left main
diagnostic techniques enable doctors to identify and treat
coronary arteries,and those who have not responded to
coronary artery disease in its earliest stages. New tech-
other treatments. It is performed in a hospital under gen-
nologies and surgical procedures have extended the lives
eral anesthesia. A heart-lung machine is used to support
of many patients who would otherwise have died.
the patient while the healthy vein or artery is attached
Research on coronary artery disease continues.
past the blockage to the coronary artery. About 70% of
patients who have bypass surgery experience full relief
from angina; about 20% experience partial relief. Only Prevention
about 3–4% of patients per year experience a return of
A healthy lifestyle can help prevent coronary artery
symptoms. Survival rates after bypass surgery decrease
disease and help keep it from progressing. A heart-
over time. At five years after surgery,survival expectancy
healthy lifestyle includes eating right,regular exercise,
is 90%; at 10 years about 80%,at 15 years about 55%,
maintaining a healthy weight, no smoking, moderate
and at 20 years about 40%.
drinking,no recreational drugs,controlling hypertension,
Three semi-experimental surgical procedures for and managing stress. Cardiac rehabilitationprograms
unblocking coronary arteries are currently being studied. are excellent to help prevent recurring coronary problems
Atherectomy is a procedure in which the cardiologist for people who are at risk and who have had coronary
shaves off and removes strips of plaque from the blocked events and procedures.
artery. In laser angioplasty,a catheter with a laser tip is
inserted into the affected artery to burn or break down the Eat right
plaque. A metal coil called a stent can be implanted per-
A healthy diet includes a variety of foods that are
manently to keep a blocked artery open. Stenting is
low in fat, especially saturated fat, low in cholesterol,
becoming more common.
and high in fiber. It includes plenty of fruits and vegeta-
bles and limited sodium. Some foods are low in fat but
Alternative treatment high in cholesterol and some are low in cholesterol but
high in fat. Saturated fat raises cholesterol and,in exces-
Natural therapies may reduce the risk of certain
sive amounts,increases the amount of the clot-forming
types of heart disease,but once symptoms appear,con-
proteins in blood. Polyunsaturated and monounsaturated
ventional medical attention is necessary. A healthy diet
fats are good for the heart. Fat should comprise no more
(including cold-water fish as a source of essential fatty
than 30% of total daily calories.
acids) and exercise, important components of conven-
Cholesterol, a waxy substance containing fats, is
tional prevention and treatment strategies, also are
found in foods such as meat, eggs, and other animal
emphasized in alternative approaches to coronary artery
products. It is also produced in the liver. Soluble fiber
disease. Herbal medicine has a variety of remedies that
can help lower cholesterol. Dietary cholesterol should be
may have a beneficial effect on coronary artery disease.
limited to about 300 milligrams per day. Many popular
For example, ginger (Zingiber officinale) may help
lipid-lowering drugs can reduce LDL cholesterol by an
reduce cholesterol. Garlic (Allium sativum),ginger,and
average of 25–30% when used with a low-fat,low-cho-
hot red or chili peppers are all circulatory enhancers that
lesterol diet.
can help prevent blood clots. Yogaand other bodywork,
massage,relaxation therapies,and talking therapies may Fruits and vegetables are rich in fiber,vitamins,and
also help prevent coronary artery disease and stop, or minerals. They are low-calorie and nearly fat free. Vita-
even reverse,the progression of atherosclerosis. Vitamin min C and beta-carotene,found in many fruits and veg-
and mineral therapy to reduce,reverse,or protect against etables,keep LDL-cholesterol from turning into a form
coronary artery disease includes chromium; calcium and that damages coronary arteries.
932 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
yretra
yranoroC
Excess sodium can increase the risk of high blood health. Several studies have shown that ex-smokers face
pressure. Many processed foods contain large amounts of the same risk of heart disease as non-smokers within five
sodium. Limit daily intake to about 2,400 milligrams, to 10 years after they quit.
about the amount in a teaspoon of salt.
Drink in moderation. Modest consumption of alco-
The “Food Guide” Pyramid developed by the U.S. hol may actually protect against coronary artery disease
Departments of Agriculture and Health and Human Ser- because alcohol appears to raise levels of HDL (“good”)
vices provides easy-to-follow guidelines for daily heart- cholesterol. The American Heart Association defines
healthy eating. It recommends six to 11 servings of bread, moderate consumption as one ounce of alcohol per day,
cereal,rice,and pasta; three to five servings of vegetables; roughly one cocktail,one 8-ounce glass of wine,or two
two to four servings of fruit; two to three servings of milk, 12-ounce glasses of beer. However,even moderate drink-
yogurt, and cheese; and two to three servings of meat, ing can increase risk factors for heart disease for some
poultry, fish, dry beans, eggs, and nuts. Fats, oils, and people (by raising blood pressure,for example). Exces-
sweets should be used sparingly. Canola and olive oil are sive drinking is always bad for the heart. It usually raises
better for the heart than other cooking oils. Coronary blood pressure and can poison the heart and cause abnor-
patients should be on a strict diet. mal heart rhythms or even heart failure.
Do not use other recreational drugs. Commonly used
Exercise regularly
recreational drugs,particularly cocaineand “crack,”can
Aerobic exercise can lower blood pressure,help con- seriously harm the heart and should never be used.
trol weight,and increase HDL (“good”) cholesterol. It may
keep the blood vessels more flexible. The Centers for Dis- Seek treatment for hypertension
ease Control and Prevention and the American College of
High blood pressure,one of the most common and
Sports Medicine recommend moderate to intense aerobic
serious risk factors for coronary artery disease, can be
exercise lasting about 30 minutes four or more times per
completely controlled through lifestyle changes and
week for maximum heart health. Three 10-minute exercise
medication. Moderate hypertension can be controlled by
periods are also beneficial. Aerobic exercise—activities
reducing dietary intake of sodium and fat,exercising reg-
such as walking,jogging,and cycling—uses the large mus-
ularly, managing stress, abstaining from smoking, and
cle groups and forces the body to use oxygen more effi-
drinking alcohol in moderation. People for whom these
ciently. It can also include everyday activities such as active
changes do not work or people with severe hypertension
gardening,climbing stairs,or brisk housework. People with
may be helped by many categories of medication.
coronary artery disease or risk factors should consult a doc-
tor before beginning an exercise program.
Manage stress
Maintain a desirable body weight Everyone experiences stress,the mental and physi-
cal reaction to life’s irritations and challenges. Stress can
About one quarter of all Americans are overweight
sometimes be avoided and when it is inevitable,it can be
and nearly one-tenth are obese,according to the Surgeon
controlled. Techniques for controlling stress include:tak-
General’s Report on Nutritionand Health. People who
ing life more slowly,spending more time with family and
are 20% or more over their ideal body weight have an
friends,thinking positively,getting enough sleep,exer-
increased risk of developing coronary artery disease.
cising,and practicing relaxation techniques.
Losing weight can help reduce total and LDL choles-
terol,reduce triglycerides,and boost HDL cholesterol. It
may also reduce blood pressure. Eating right and exercis- Resources
ing are two key components of losing weight.
BOOKS
American Heart Association and American Cancer Society.
Avoid recreational drugs
Living Well,Staying Well.New York:Time Books,1996.
Do not smoke or use tobacco. Smoking has many DeBakey Michael E.,and Antonio M. Gotto Jr. “Coronary
Artery Disease,”and “Surgical Treatment of Coronary
adverse effects on the heart. It increases the heart rate,
Artery Disease.”In The New Living Heart. Holbrook,
constricts major arteries,and can create irregular heart-
MA:Adams Media Corporation,1997.
beats. It raises blood pressure,contributes to the develop-
“Heart Disease.”In New Choices in Natural Healing,ed. Bill
ment of plaque,increases the formation of blood clots,
Gottlieb,et al. Emmaus,PA:Rodale Press,1995.
and causes blood platelets to cluster and impede blood
“Heart Disease.”In The Complete Family Guide to Alternative
flow. Heart damage caused by smoking can be repaired Medicine,ed. C. Norman Shealy. New York:Barnes &
by quitting. Even heavy smokers can return to heart Noble Books,1996.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 933
Coronary
artery
disease
“Heart Problems.”In The Alternative Advisor:The Complete with coronary artery disease. In this disease,the blood
Guide to Natural Therapies & Alternative Treatments. vessels on the heart become narrow. When this happens,
Alexandria,VA:Time-Life Books,1997. the oxygen supply is reduced to the heart muscle. The
Notelovitz,Morris,and Diana Tonnessen. The Essential Heart primary cause of coronary artery disease is fat deposits
Book for Women.New York:St. Martin’s Press,1996.
blocking the arteries (atherosclerosis). In many cases,
Texas Heart Institute. “Coronary Artery Disease,Angina,and
balloon angioplasty is unsuccessful and the vessel closes
Heart Attacks.”In Texas Heart Institute Heart Owner’s
after the procedure (restenosis). By forming a rigid sup-
Handbook.New York:John Wiley & Sons,1996.
port,the stent can prevent restenosis and reduce the need
PERIODICALS for coronary bypass surgery. The stent is usually a stain-
“Exercise Stress Test:A Simple Way to Spot Heart Disease.” less steel mesh tube. Since the stent will be placed inside
Mayo Clinic Health Letter(Sept. 1996). an artery,the device comes in various sizes to match the
“More Evidence for Infection as a Cause of Heart Disease.”
size of the artery.
Harvard Heart Letter7 (Feb. 1997):6-7.
“Women and Heart Disease”Harvard Women’s Health Watch4
(July 1997):4-5. Precautions
Zamula,Evelyn. “Balloons to Bypass Bypass Surgery.”FDA
Any foreign object in the body, like a stent, will
Consumer22 (1 May 1988):24-27.
increase the risk of thrombosis. Anticlotting medication
ORGANIZATIONS is given to prevent this complication.
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105, Description
Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
Coronary stenting usually follows balloon angio-
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
plasty,which requires inserting a balloon catheter into
Texas Heart Institute. Heart Information Service. P.O. Box 20345,
Houston,TX 77225-0345. <http://www.tmc.edu/thi>. the femoral artery in the upper thigh. When this catheter
is positioned at the location of the blockage in the coro-
OTHER
nary artery,it is slowly inflated to widen that artery,and
“Facts About Coronary Heart Disease.”National Heart,Lung,
is then removed. The stent catheter is then threaded into
and Blood Institute.27 Nov. 1998. 3 Mar. 1998 <http://
the artery and the stent is placed around a deflated bal-
www.nhlbi.nih.gov/index.htm>.
loon. When this is correctly positioned in the coronary
“Heart and Stroke 1998 Update.”American Heart Association.
artery,the balloon is inflated,expanding the stent against
3 Mar. 1998 <http://www.americanheart.org>.
the walls of the coronary artery. The balloon catheter is
removed,leaving the stent in place to hold the coronary
Lori De Milto
artery open. A cardiac angiographywill follow to insure
that the stent is keeping the artery open.
Coronary disease see Coronary artery
disease
Alternative procedures
Coronary heart disease see Coronary artery
disease Balloon angioplasty and coronary stenting are per-
formed to relieve the symptoms of coronary artery disease.
By the time coronary artery disease progresses and
requires balloon angioplasty,there is no alternative to bal-
loon angioplasty other than coronary bypass surgery.
Coronary bypass surgery carries greater risks. However,
Coronary stenting
since coronary artery disease can be related to high fat
diets,smoking,and lack of exercise,changes in lifestyle
Definition
may reduce the risk of developing the disease. Various
A coronary stent is an artificial support device used medications for cholesterol,high blood pressure,and dia-
in the coronary artery to keep the vessel open. betes also can help treat or prevent coronary artery disease.
Purpose Preparation
The coronary stent is a relatively new tool used to Before the stent is inserted,the patient will probably
keep coronary arteries expanded,usually following a bal- be instructed to take aspirinfor several days. Aspirin can
loon angioplasty. Balloon angioplasty is used in patients help decrease the possibility of blood clots forming at the
934 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gnitnets
yranoroC
Clinic Practice of Cardiology,ed. Emilio R. Giuliani,et
KEY TERMS al. St. Louis:Mosby Publishing,1996.
ORGANIZATIONS
Balloon angioplasty—The use of a balloon American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
attached to a catheter to widen an artery that has 75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
become narrowed. As the balloon is inflated, it
OTHER
opens the artery.
AdvocateHealthCare.<http://www.advocatehealth.com>.
Cardiac angiography—A procedure used to visu-
alize blood vessels of the heart. A catheter is used Cindy L. A. Jones,PhD
to inject a dye into the vessels; the vessels can
then be seen by x ray. Coronary thrombosis see Heart attack
Catheter—A long thin flexible tube that can be
Coronavirus infection see Common cold
inserted into the body; in this case, it is threaded
to the heart.
Restenosis—The narrowing of a blood vessel after
it has been opened, usually by balloon angioplasty.
Thrombosis—The development of a blood clot in
Corticosteroids
the vessels. This thrombosis may clog a blood ves-
sel and stop the flow of blood. Definition
Corticosteriods are a group of natural and synthetic
analogues of the hormones secreted by the hypothalamic-
anterior pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) axis,more com-
stent. Because anesthesia will be used during the proce-
monly referred to as the pituitary gland. These include
dure,the patient should not eat or drink after midnight of
glucocorticoids,which are anti-inflammatory agents with
the previous day.
a large number of other functions; mineralocorticoids,
which control salt and water balance primarily through
Aftercare action on the kidneys; and corticotropins,which control
secretion of hormones by the pituitary gland.
Following the procedure,blood thinners (anticoagu-
lants) will be given through a needle in a vein for about
24 hours. The patient should remain flat and still for Purpose
awhile to allow the femoral artery to heal from the inser-
Glucocorticoids have multiple effects,and are used
tion of the catheter. Medication to control blood clotting
for a large number of conditions. They affect glucose uti-
should be taken after the patient is discharged from the
lization,fat metabolism,and bone development,and are
hospital. A special diet may also be recommended that is
potent anti-inflammatory agents. They may be used for
low in vitamin K and cholesterol. With time,the patient
replacement of natural hormones in patients with pitu-
should begin light exercise,like walking. It is important
itary deficiency (Addison’s disease), as well as for a
that no magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) tests are
wide number of other conditions including,but not limit-
given for six months because the magnetic field may
ed to, arthritis, asthma, anemia, various cancers, and
move the stent.
skin inflammations. Additional uses include inhibition of
nausea and vomitingafter chemotherapy,treatment of
Risks septic shock,treatment of spinal cord injuries,and treat-
ment of hirisutism (excessive hair growth). The choice of
Although coronary stents greatly reduce the risk of
drug will vary with the condition. Cortisone and hydro-
restenosis following balloon angioplasty, there is still
cortisone,which have both glucocorticoid and mineralo-
some risk that the stented artery may close. Thrombosis,
corticoid effects,are the drugs of choice for replacement
bleeding,and artery damage are also risks.
therapy of natural hormone deficiency. Synthetic com-
pounds, which have greater anti-inflammatory effects
Resources and less effect on salt and water balance,are usually pre-
BOOKS ferred for other purposes. These compounds include dex-
Garratt,Kirk N.,Guy S. Reeder,and David R. Holmes Jr. amethasone,which is almost exclusively glucocorticoid
“Cardiac Catheterization and Angiography.”In Mayo in its actions, as well as prednisone, prednisolone,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 935
Corticosteroids
Recommended dosage
KEY TERMS
The dosage of glucocorticoids varies with the drug,
route of administration, condition being treated, and
Hallucination—A false or distorted perception of
patient. Consult specific references.
objects, sounds, or events that seems real. Halluci-
Fludrocortisone,for use in replacement therapy,is
nations usually result from drugs or mental disor-
normally dosed at 0.1 mg/day. Some patients require
ders.
higher doses. It should normally be administered in con-
Hormone—A substance that is produced in one
junction with cortisone or hydrocortisone.
part of the body, then travels through the blood-
stream to another part of the body where it has its ACTH,when used for diagnostic purposes,is given
effect. as 10–25 units dissolved in 500 ml of 5% dextrose injec-
tion-infused IV over eight hours. A long-acting form,
Inflammation—Pain, redness, swelling, and heat
which may be used for replacement therapy,is given by
that usually develop in response to injury or ill-
subcutaneous (SC) or intramuscular (IM) injection at a
ness.
dose of 40 to 80 units every 24–72 hours.
Ointment—A thick, spreadable substance that
contains medicine and is meant to be used on the
Precautions
outside of the body.
Pregnancy category—A system of classifying Glucocorticoids
drugs according to their established risks for use
The most significant risk associated with administra-
during pregnancy. Category A: controlled human
tion of glucocorticoids is suppression of natural corticos-
studies have demonstrated no fetal risk. Category
teroid secretion. When the hormones are administered,
B: animal studies indicate no fetal risk, but no
they suppress the secretion of ACTH, which in turn
human studies; or adverse effects in animals, but
reduces the secretion of the natural hormones. The extent
not in well-controlled human studies. Category C:
of suppression varies with dose,drug potency,duration of
no adequate human or animal studies; or adverse
treatment,and individual patient response. While suppres-
fetal effects in animal studies, but no available
sion is seen primarily with drugs administered systemical-
human data. Category D: evidence of fetal risk,
ly,it can also occur with topical drugs such as creams and
but benefits outweigh risks. Category X: evidence
ointments, or drugs administered by inhalation. Abrupt
of fetal risk. Risks outweigh any benefits.
cessation of corticosteroids may result in acute adrenal cri-
sis (Addisonian crisis) that is marked by dehydration
with severe vomiting and diarrhea,hypotension,and loss
of consciousness. Acute adrenal crisis is potentially fatal.
betamethasone,trimacinolone,and others. Glucocorti-
Chronic overdose of glucocorticoids leads to Cushin-
coids are formulated in oral dosage forms,topical creams
goid syndrome,which is clinically identical to Cushing’s
and ointments,oral and nasal inhalations,rectal foams,
syndrome and differs only in that in Cushingoid, the
and ear and eye drops.
excessive steroids are from drug therapy rather than
Mineralocorticoids control the retention of sodium excessive glandular secretion. Symptoms vary,but most
in the kidneys. In mineralocorticoid deficiency,there is people have upper body obesity,rounded face,increased
excessive loss of sodium through the kidneys, with fat around the neck, and thinning arms and legs. In its
resulting water loss. Fludrocortisone (Florinef) is the later stages,this condition leads to weakening of bones
only drug available for treatment of mineralocorticoid and muscles with rib and spinal column fractures.
deficiency,and is available only in an oral dosage form. The short term adverse effects of corticosteroids are
generally mild, and include indigestion, increased
Corticotropin (ACTH,adrenocorticotropic hormone)
appetite, insomnia, and nervousness. There are also a
stimulates the pituitary gland to release cortisone. A defi-
very large number of infrequent adverse reactions, the
ciency of corticotropic hormone will have the same effects
most significant of which is drug induced-paranoia.
as a deficiency of cortisone. The hormone,which is avail-
Delerium, depression, menstrual irregularity, and
able under the brand names Acthar and Actrel,is used for
increased hair growth are also possible. Consult detailed
diagnostic testing,to determine the cause of a glucocorti-
reviews for further information.
coid deficiency,but is rarely used for replacement therapy
since direct administration of glucocorticoids may be easi- Long-term use of topical glucocorticoids can result
er and offers better control over dosages. in thinning of the skin. Oral steroid inhalations may cause
936 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sdioretsocitroC
fungal overgrowth in the oral cavity. Patients must be Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America. 1125 15th Street
instructed to rinse their mouths carefully after each dose. NW,Suite 502,Washington,DC 20005. (800) 727-8462.
Corticosteroids are pregnancy category C. The drugs <http://www.aafa.org>.
have caused congenital malformations in animal studies, National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. National Institutes of
Health. P.O. Box 30105,Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301)
including cleft palate. Breastfeeding should be avoided.
251-1222. <http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/nhlbi/nhlbi.htm>.
Mineralocorticoids
Samuel Uretsky,PharmD
Because fludrocortisone has glucocorticoid activity
as well as mineralocorticoid action,the same hazards and
Corticotropin test see Adrenocorticotropic
precautions apply to fludrocortisone as to the glucocorti-
hormone test
coids. Overdose of fludrocortisone may also cause
edema,hypertension,and congestive heart failure.
Corticotropins
Corticotropin has all the same risks as the glucocor-
Cortisol tests
ticoids. Prolonged use may cause reduced response to the
stimulatory effects of corticotropin.
Definition
Warnings and contraindications This test is a measure of serum cortisol (also known
as hydrocortisone),or urine cortisol (also known as uri-
Use corticosteroids with caution in patients with the
nary free cortisol),an important hormone produced by a
following conditions:
pair of endocrine glands called the adrenal glands.
•osteoporosis or any other bone disease
•current or past tuberculosis
Purpose
•glaucoma or cataracts
This test is performed on patients who may have
•infections of any type (virus,bacteria,fungus,amoeba)
malfunctioning adrenal glands. Blood and urine cortisol,
•sores in the nose or recent nose surgery (if using nasal together with the determination of adrenocorticotropic
spray forms of corticosteroids) hormone (ACTH),are the three most important tests in
•underactive or overactive thyroid the investigation of Cushing’s syndrome(caused by an
•liver disease overproduction of cortisol) and Addison’s disease
(caused by the underproduction of cortisol).
•stomach or intestine problems
•diabetes
Precautions
•heart disease
Increased levels of cortisol are associated with preg-
•high blood pressure
nancy. Physical and emotional stress can also elevate
•high cholesterol
cortisol levels. Drugs that may cause increased levels of
•kidney disease or kidney stones
cortisol include estrogen,oral contraceptives,ampheta-
•myasthenia gravis mines,cortisone,and spironolactone (Aldactone). Drugs
•systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) that may cause decreased levels include androgens,
•emotional problems aminoglutethimide, betamethasone, and other steroid
medications,danazol,lithium,levodopa,metyrapone and
•skin conditions that cause the skin to be thinner to
phenytoin (Dilantin).
bruise more easily
Interactions Description
Corticosteroids have many drug interactions. Con- Cortisol is a potent hormone known as a glucocorti-
sult specific references. coid that affects the metabolism of carbohydrates,pro-
teins,and fats,but especially glucose. Cortisol increases
Resources blood sugar levels by stimulating the release of glucose
from glucose stores in cells. It also acts to inhibit insulin,
ORGANIZATIONS
thus affecting glucose transport into cells.
American Academy of Allergy,Asthma and Immunology. 611
East Wells Street,Milwaukee,WI 53202. (414) 272-6071. The hypothalamus (an area of the brain), the pitu-
<http://www.aaaai.org>. itary gland (sometimes called the “master gland”),and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 937
Cortisol
tests
Preparation
KEY TERMS
When testing for cortisol levels through the blood,a
blood specimen is usually collected at 8 A.M. and again at
Addison’s disease—A rare disorder in which symp-
4 P.M. It should be noted that normal values may be trans-
toms are caused by a deficiency of hydrocortisone
posed in individuals who have worked during the night
(cortisol) and aldosterone, two corticosteroid hor-
and slept during the day for long periods of time.
mones normally produced by a part of the adrenal
When testing for cortisol level through the urine,a
glands called the adrenal cortex. Symptoms include
24-hour urine sample is collected,refrigerated,and sent
weakness, tiredness, vague abdominal pain, weight
to the reference laboratory for examination.
loss, skin pigmentation and low blood pressure.
Adrenal glands—A pair of endocrine glands (glands
Risks
that secrete hormones directly into the blood-
stream) that are located on top of the kidneys. Risks for the blood test are minimal, but may
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)—Also include slight bleeding from the blood-drawing site,
called corticotropin, this hormone is produced by fainting or feeling lightheaded after venipuncture, or
the pituitary gland to stimulate the adrenal cortex hematoma (blood accumulating under the puncture site).
to release various corticosteroid hormones.
Cushing’s syndrome—A hormonal disorder caused Normal results
by an abnormally high level of corticosteroid hor-
Reference ranges for cortisol vary from laboratory to
mones that are produced by the adrenal glands. Cor-
laboratory but are usually within the following ranges for
ticosteroid hormones control the body’s use of nutri-
blood:
ents and the excretion of salts and water in the urine.
Symptoms include high blood sugar levels, a moon
•adults (8 A.M.):6–28 mg/dL; adults (4 P.M.):2–12 mg/dL
face, weight gain, and increased blood pressure •child one to six years (8 A.M.):3–21 mg/dL; child one
to six years (4 P.M.):3–10 mg/dL
•newborn:1/24 mg/dL
Reference ranges for cortisol vary from laboratory to
the adrenal glands coordinate the production of cortisol. laboratory,but are usually within the following ranges
After corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) is made in for 24-hour urine collection:
the hypothalamus,CRH stimulates the pituitary to pro-
•adult:10–100 mg/24 hours
duce adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The produc-
•adolescent:5–55 mg/24 hours
tion of ACTH in turn stimulates a part of the adrenal
glands known as the adrenal cortex to produce cortisol. •child:2–27 mg/24 hours
Rising levels of cortisol act as a negative feedback to cur-
tail further production of CRH and ACTH,thus complet- Abnormal results
ing an elaborate feedback mechanism.
Increased levels of cortisol are found in Cushing’s
There are two methods for evaluating cortisol:blood syndrome,excess thyroid (hyperthyroidism),obesity,
and urine. The most reliable index of cortisol secretion is ACTH-producing tumors,and high levels of stress.
the 24-hour urine sample collection,but when blood lev-
Decreased levels of cortisol are found in Addison’s
els are required or requested by the physician, plasma
disease,conditions of low thyroid,and hypopituitarism,
cortisol should be measured in the morning and again in
in which pituitary activity is diminished.
the afternoon. Cortisol levels normally rise and fall dur-
ing the day in what is called a diurnal variation,so that
Resources
cortisol is at its highest level between 6–8 A.M. and grad-
ually falls, reaching its lowest point around midnight. BOOKS
One reason for ordering blood cortisol levels versus a 24- Cahill,Mathew. Handbook of Diagnostic Tests.Springhouse,
hour urine collection is that sometimes the earliest sign PA:Springhouse Corporation,1995.
of adrenal malfunction is the loss of this diurnal varia- Jacobs,David S.,et al. Laboratory Test Handbook.4th ed. New
York:Lexi-Comp,Inc.,1996.
tion,even though the cortisol levels are not yet elevated.
Pagana,Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
For example,individuals with Cushing’s syndrome often
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis:Mosby,Inc.,1998.
have upper normal plasma cortisol levels in the morning
and exhibit no decline as the day progresses. Janis O. Flores
938 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stset
lositroC
Cosmetic dentistry KEY TERMS
Definition
Bleaching—Technique used to brighten stained
Cosmetic dentistry includes a variety of dental treat- teeth.
ments aimed at improving the appearance of the teeth.
Bonding—Rebuilding, reshaping, and covering
tooth defects using tooth-colored materials.
Purpose Composite resin—Plastic material matching natur-
al tooth color used to replace missing parts of a
The purpose of cosmetic dentistry is to improve the
tooth.
appearance of the teeth using bleaching, bonding,
veneers,reshaping,orthodontics,or implants.
Description During cosmetic reshaping, some enamel is
removed from the uneven tooth so it more closely match-
Bleaching is done to lighten teeth that are stained
es other teeth.
or discolored. It entails the use of a bleaching solution
applied by a dentist or a gel in a tray that fits over the Orthodontics involves applying braces to the teeth,
teeth used at home under a dentist’s supervision. Bond- and wires are threaded through the braces. These wires
ing involves applying tooth-colored plastic putty,called are adjusted to gradually move the teeth to the desired
composite resin, to the surface of chipped or broken new positions. Over time,crowded or misaligned teeth
teeth. This resin is also used to fill cavities in front teeth are straightened.
(giving a more natural-looking result) and to fill gaps
Implants are more secure and natural looking than
between teeth. Veneers are thin, porcelain shells that
dentures or bridgework,but are much more expensive.
cover the front of the teeth. They can improve the
First an anchor for the implant is attached to the jaw
appearance of damaged,discolored,misshapen,or mis-
bone. This surgery can take several hours. About six
aligned teeth. Reshaping involves the removal of enam-
months later, after the bone around the anchor has
el from a misshapen tooth so that it matches other teeth.
healed,a post is attached to the anchor,and an artificial
Orthodontics uses braces to correct the position of
tooth is attached to the post. The whole process may take
crowded or misaligned teeth. Implants are artificial
about nine months to complete.
teeth which are attached directly to the jaw to replace
missing teeth.
Aftercare
Preparation Periodic touch-up may be needed to keep the teeth
white if the teeth have been bleached or bonded. Also,the
Bleaching involves having a custom-made bleaching
resin used in bonded teeth can be chipped by ice,popcorn
tray made by the dentist. This tray is worn at home for
kernels,or hard candy,requiring repair. Veneered teeth
several hours each day or night. Teeth slowly become
may need to be reveneered after five to 12 years. Once
white over a period of one to six weeks. Bleaching can
orthodontic braces are removed, regular visits to the
also be done in a dentist’s office. A heat- or light-activated
orthodontist are advised because teeth can shift position.
bleaching solution is applied to six to eight teeth per visit.
Implanted teeth require regular dental checkups to ensure
Bonding involves etching the surface of the tooth so that the anchor and post are stable.
composite resin can adhere. The dentist then contours the
resin to the right shape, and smooths and polishes the
Risks
resin after it is hard and dry.
After teeth are bleached,they may darken faster if
To prepare for the application of a veneer,a thin layer
exposed to staining products such as coffee or tobacco.
of enamel is removed from the tooth (so that the finished
Some patients experience increased sensitivity to cold
tooth will be flush with surrounding teeth) and an impres-
while teeth are being bleached,but the sensitivity usually
sion of the tooth is taken from which the veneer will be
disappears shortly after completion of the treatment.
created. Before a veneer is applied, the tooth is etched
with an acid solution and an adhesive resin is painted on Bonded teeth, like bleached teeth, may also stain
the tooth. The veneer is then applied,the resin is hardened more easily than natural teeth. Bonding materials also
with a bonding light,and the dentist polishes the veneer. chip easily.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 939
Cosmetic
dentistry
Because cosmetic reshaping involves the removal of
enamel,the process is irreversible because enamel can- KEY TERMS
not be replaced once it is removed.
The anchors of implanted teeth can loosen and cause Inflammation—Process whereby the immune sys-
pain; regular dental checkups are recommended. tem reacts to infection or other stimulus, charac-
terized by pain, swelling, redness, and warmth of
the affected part
Normal results
Cosmetic dentistry can improve the appearance of
stained,chipped,misshapen,or crowded teeth.
The primary symptom of costochondritis is severe
chest wall pain, which may vary in intensity. The pain
Resources
becomes worse with trunk movement, deep breathing,
ORGANIZATIONS and/or exertion,and better with decreased movement,quiet
American Dental Association. 211 E. Chicago Ave.,Chicago,
breathing,or changing of position. It is usually localized but
IL 60611. (312) 440-2500. <http://www.ada.org>.
may radiate extensively from the chest area. The pain has
been described as sharp,nagging,aching,or pressure-like.
Joseph Knight,PA
Cosmetic surgery see Plastic, cosmetic, and Diagnosis
reconstructive surgery Diagnosis is based on pain upon palpation (gentle
pressing) of the affected joints. Swelling is not associated
with costochondritis. Diagnosis is also dependent on the
exclusion of other causes,including heart attack or bac-
terial or fungal infections found in IV drug users or post-
operative thoracic surgerypatients.
Costochondritis
Definition Treatment
Costochondritis is an inflammation and associated The goals of treatment are to reduce inflammation and
tenderness of the cartilage (i.e.,the costochondral joints) to control pain. To accomplish these goals,nonsteroidal
that attaches the front of the ribs to the breastbone. anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) are used,with ibupro-
fen usually selected as the drug of choice. Other NSAIDS
options are flurbiprofen,mefenamic acid,ketoprofen,and
Description
naproxen. Additional treatment recommendations include
Costochondritis causes painin the lower rib area or the use of local heat,biofeedback,and gentle stretching of
upper breastbone. Some patients fear they are having a the pectoralis muscles two to three times a day.
heart attack. The most severe pain is usually between the
For more difficult cases,where the patient continues
breast and the upper abdomen. The pain may be greater
to exhibit pain and discomfort,cortisone injections are
when in sitting or reclining positions. Stressmay aggra-
used as therapy.
vate this condition. Generally the third or fourth ribs are
affected. However,any of the seven costochondral junc-
tions may be affected,and more often than not more than Alternative treatment
one site is involved. The inflammation can involve carti- Supplements that are used to reduce inflammation
lage areas on both sides of the sternum,but usually is on have been used to treat costochondritis. Examples of
one side only. Costochondritis should be distinguished such supplements include ginger root,evening primrose
from Tietze Syndrome,which is an inflammation involv- oil,bromelain,vitamin E,omega-3 oils,and white wil-
ing the same area of the chest,but also includes swelling. low bark. Glucosamine/chondroitin sulfate,which may
aid in the healing of cartilage,has also been used. Other
Causes and symptoms alternative therapies include acupunctureand massages.
The causes of costochondritis are not well-under-
Prognosis
stood and may be difficult to establish. The most likely
causes include injury, repetitive minor trauma, and The prognosis for recovery from costochondritis is
unusual excessive physical activity. good. For most patients, the condition lessens in six
940 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitirdnohcotsoC
months to a year. However,after one year,about one-half In normal situations, most people cough once or
of patients continue with some discomfort,while about twice an hour during the day to clear the airway of irri-
one-third still report tenderness with palpation. tants. However, when the level of irritants in the air is
high or when the respiratory system becomes infected,
coughing may become frequent and prolonged. It may
Prevention
interfere with exerciseor sleep,and it may also cause dis-
Though the causes of costochondritis are not well tress if accompanied by dizziness,chest pain,or breath-
known,avoidance of activities that may strain (e.g.,the lessness. In the majority cases,frequent coughing lasts
repetitive misuse of muscles) or cause trauma to the rib one to two weeks and tapers off as the irritant or infection
cage is recommended to prevent the occurrence of costo- subsides. If a cough lasts more than three weeks it is con-
chondritis. Modification of improper posture or sidered a chronic cough,and physicians will try to deter-
ergonomics of the home or work place may also deter the mine a cause beyond an acute infection or irritant.
development of this condition.
Coughs are generally described as either dry or pro-
ductive. A dry cough does not bring up a mixture of
Resources mucus, irritants, and other substances from the lungs
(sputum),while a productive cough does. In the case of a
OTHER
bacterial infection,the sputum brought up in a productive
Day,C. Costochondritis Web Site.2001. <http://www.geocities.
com/Hots/2338/#Frequently%20Asked%20Questions>. cough may be greenish,gray,or brown. In the case of an
Flowers,L. K.,and B. D. Wippermann. “Costochondritis.” allergy or viral infection it may be clear or white. In the
eMedicine Journal:Emergency Medicine/Rheumatology. most serious conditions,the sputum may contain blood.
23 Feb. 2001. <http://www.emedicine.com/emerg/topic
116.htm>.
Causes and symptoms
Judith Sims In the majority of cases,coughs are caused by respi-
ratory infections,including:
Cotrel-Dubousset spinal instrumentation see
•colds or influenza,the most common causes of coughs
Spinal instrumentation
•bronchitis,an inflammation of the mucous membranes
of the bronchial tubes
•croup, a viral inflammation of the larynx, windpipe,
and bronchial passages that produces a bark-like cough
in children
Cough
•whooping cough,a bacterial infection accompanied by
Definition the high-pitched cough for which it is named
A cough is a forceful release of air from the lungs •pneumonia, a potentially serious bacterial infection
that can be heard. Coughing protects the respiratory sys- that produces discolored or bloody mucus
tem by clearing it of irritants and secretions.
•tuberculosis, another serious bacterial infection that
produces bloody sputum
Description •fungal infections,such as aspergillosis,histoplasmo-
sis,and cryptococcoses
While people can generally cough voluntarily, a
cough is usually a reflex triggered when an irritant stim- Environmental pollutants,such as cigarette smoke,
ulates one or more of the cough receptors found at dif- dust,or smog,can also cause a cough. In the case of cig-
ferent points in the respiratory system. These receptors arette smokers,the nicotine present in the smoke para-
then send a message to the cough center in the brain, lyzes the hairs (cilia) that regularly flush mucus from the
which in turn tells the body to cough. A cough begins respiratory system. The mucus then builds up, forcing
with a deep breath in, at which point the opening the body to removed it by coughing. Post-nasal drip,the
between the vocal cords at the upper part of the larynx irritating trickle of mucus from the nasal passages into
(glottis) shuts, trapping the air in the lungs. As the the throat caused by allergiesor sinusitis,can also result
diaphragm and other muscles involved in breathing in a cough. Some chronic conditions, such as asthma,
press against the lungs,the glottis suddenly opens,pro- chronic bronchitis,emphysema,and cystic fibrosis,are
ducing an explosive outflow of air at speeds greater than characterized in part by a cough. A condition in which
100 mi (160 km) per hour. stomach acid backs up into the esophagus (gastroe-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 941
Cough
medicines may be given if the patient cannot rest because
KEY TERMS of the cough or if the cough is not productive,as is the
case with most coughs associated with colds or flu. The
Antitussives—Drugs used to suppress coughing. two types of drugs used to treat coughs are antitussives
and expectorants.
Expectorant—Drug used to thin mucus.
Gastroesophageal reflux—Condition in which Antitussives
stomach acid backs up into the esophagus.
Antitussives are drugs that suppress a cough. Nar-
Glottis—The opening between the vocal cords at
cotics—primarily codeine—are used as antitussives and
the upper part of the larynx.
work by depressing the cough center in the brain. How-
Larynx—A part of the respiratory tract between the ever,they can cause such side effects as drowsiness,nau-
pharynx and the trachea, having walls of cartilage sea,and constipation. Dextromethorphan,the primary
and muscle and containing the vocal cords. ingredient in many over-the-counter cough remedies,
also depresses the brain’s cough center,but without the
Sputum—The mixture of mucus, irritants, and
side effects associated with narcotics. Demulcents
other substances expelled from the lungs by
relieve coughing by coating irritated passageways.
coughing.
Expectorants
Expectorants are drugs that make mucus easier to
sophageal reflux) can cause coughing,especially when a cough up by thinning it. Guaifenesin and terpin hydrate
person is lying down. A cough can also be a side-effect are the primary ingredients in most over-the-counter
of medications that are administered via an inhaler. It can expectorants. However,some studies have shown that in
also be a side-effect of beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors, acute infections,simply increasing fluid intake has the
which are drugs used for treating high blood pressure. same thinning effect as taking expectorants.
Diagnosis Alternative treatment
To determine the cause of a cough, a physician Coughs due to bacterial or viral upper respiratory
should take an exact medical history and perform an infections may be effectively treated with botanical and
exam. Information regarding the duration of the cough, homeopathic therapies. The choice of remedy will vary
what other symptoms may accompany it,and what envi- and be specific to the type of cough the patient has. Some
ronmental factors may influence it aid the doctor in his or combination over-the-counter herbal and homeopathic
her diagnosis. The appearance of the sputum will also cough formulas can be very effective for cough relief.
help determine what type of infection, if any, may be Lingering coughs or coughing up blood should be treated
involved. The doctor may even observe the sputum by a trained practitioner.
microscopically for the presence of bacteria and white Many health practitioners advise increasing fluids
blood cells. Chest x rays may help indicate the presence and breathing in warm,humidified air as ways of loosen-
and extent of such infections as pneumonia or tuberculo- ing chest congestion. Others recommend hot tea flavored
sis. If these actions are not enough to determine the cause with honey as a temporary home remedy for coughs
of the cough,a bronchoscopyor laryngoscopymay be caused by colds or flu. Various vitamins,such as vitamin
ordered. These tests use slender tubular instruments to C, may be helpful in preventing or treating conditions
inspect the interior of the bronchi and larynx. (including colds and flu) that lead to coughs. Avoiding of
mucous-producing foods can be effective in healing a
cough condition. These mucous-producing foods can
Treatment
vary,based on individual intolerance,but dairy products
Treatment of a cough generally involves addressing are a major mucous-producing food for most people.
the condition causing it. An acute infection such as pneu-
monia may require antibiotics, an asthma-induced
Prognosis
cough may be treated with the use of bronchodialators,
or an antihistamine may be administered in the case of an Because the majority of coughs are related to the
allergy. Physicians prefer not to suppress a productive common coldor influenza,most will end in seven to 21
cough,since it aids the body in clearing respiratory sys- days. The outcome of coughs due to a more serious under-
tem of infective agents and irritants. However, cough lying disease depends on the pathology of that disease.
942 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
hguoC
Prevention
KEY TERMS
It is important to identify and treat the underlying
disease and origin of the cough. Avoid smoking and
Asthma—A disease in which the air passages of
coming in direct contact with people experiencing cold
the lungs become inflamed and narrowed.
or flu symptoms. Wash hands frequently during episodes
of upper-respiratory illnesses. Bronchitis—Inflammation of the air passages of
the lungs.
Resources Chronic—A word used to describe a long-lasting
condition. Chronic conditions often develop grad-
BOOKS
ually and involve slow changes.
Chandrasoma,Parakrama,and Clive R. Taylor. Concise Pathol-
ogy.East Norwalk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1991. Emphysema—An irreversible lung disease in
Schumann,Lorna. “Alterations in Respiratory Function.”In which breathing becomes increasingly difficult.
Perspectives on Pathophysiology,ed. Lee-Ellen Copstead.
Mucus—Thick fluid produced by the moist mem-
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1994.
branes that line many body cavities and structures.
PERIODICALS
Phenylketonuria (PKU)—A genetic disorder in
Philp,Elizabeth B. “Chronic Cough.”American Family Physi-
cian56 (1 Oct. 1997). which the body lacks an important enzyme. If
untreated, the disorder can lead to brain damage
ORGANIZATIONS
and mental retardation.
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. PO Box 30105,
Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
such as Vicks Formula 44,Drixoral Cough Liquid Caps,
Jeffrey P. Larson,RPT Sucrets Cough Control, Benylin DM and some Robi-
tussin products. These medicines come in capsule,tablet,
lozenge, and liquid forms and are available without a
physician’s prescription.
Cough suppressants
Recommended dosage
Definition Regular (short-acting) capsules, lozenges, syrups,
or tablets:
Cough suppressants are medicines that prevent or
stop coughing. ADULTS AND CHILDREN OVER 12. 10-30 mg every
4-8 hours,as needed.
Purpose
CHILDREN 6-12. 5-15 mg every 4-8 hours,as needed.
Cough suppressants act on the center in the brain
CHILDREN 2-6. 2.5-7.5 mg every 4-8 hours,as need-
that controls the cough reflex. They are meant to be used
ed.
only to relieve dry,hacking coughs associated with colds
Children under 6 should not be given lozenges con-
and flu. They should not be used to treat coughs that
taining dextromethorphan because of the high dose of
bring up mucus or the chronic coughs associated with
dextromethorphan in each lozenge.
smoking,asthma,emphysemaor other lung problems.
Many cough medicines contain cough suppressants CHILDREN UNDER 2. Check with child’s physician.
along with other ingredients. Some combinations of Children under 6 should not be given lozenges con-
ingredients may cancel each other’s effects. One example taining dextromethorphan.
is the combination of cough suppressant with an expecto-
rant—a medicine that loosens and clears mucus from the For extended-release oral suspension
airways. The cough suppressant interferes with the ability
ADULTS AND CHILDREN OVER 12. 60 mg every 12
to cough up the mucus that the expectorant loosens.
hours,as needed.
Description CHILDREN 6-12. 30 mg every 12 hours,as needed.
CHILDREN 2-6. 15 mg every 12 hours,as needed.
The cough suppressant described here, dextrom-
ethorphan, is an ingredient in many cough medicines, CHILDREN UNDER 2. Check with child’s physician.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 943
Cough
suppressants
Precautions CPR see Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Do not take more than the recommended daily Crab lice see Lice infestation
dosage of dextromethorphan.
Cradle cap see Seborrheic dermatitis
Dextromethorphan is not meant to be used for
Cramps see Dysmenorrhea
coughs associated with smoking, asthma, emphysema,
chronic bronchitis, or other lung conditions. It also Cranial arteritis see Temporal arteritis
should not be used for coughs that produce mucus.
Cranial manipulation see Craniosacral
A lingering cough could be a sign of a serious med-
therapy
ical condition. Coughs that last more than seven days or
are associated with fever, rash, sore throat, or lasting Craniopharyngioma see Pituitary tumors
headacheshould have medical attention. Call a physi-
cian as soon as possible.
People with phenylketonuriashould be aware that
some products with dextromethorphan also contain the
artificial sweetener aspartame,which breaks down in the Craniosacral therapy
body to phenylalanine.
Definition
Anyone who has asthma or liver disease should
check with a physician before taking dextromethorphan. Craniosacral therapy is a holistic healing practice
that uses very light touching to balance the craniosacral
Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding or who
system in the body,which includes the bones,nerves,flu-
plan to become pregnant should check with their physi-
ids,and connective tissues of the cranium and spinal area.
cians before taking dextromethorphan.
The dye tartrazine is an ingredient in some cough
Purpose
suppressant products. This dye causes allergic reactions
in some people, especially those who are allergic to According to Upledger,craniosacral therapy is ide-
aspirin. ally suited for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD),headaches,chronic middle ear infection,pain,
and general health maintenance. It is recommended for
Side effects
autism, fibromyalgia, heart disease, osteoarthritis,
Side effects are rare,but may include nausea,vomit- pneumonia,rheumatoid arthritis,chronic sinus infec-
ing,stomach upset,slight drowsiness,and dizziness. tions,and gastroenteritis(inflammation of the lining of
the stomach or small intestine). It is also used with other
therapies to treat chronic fatigue syndrome,back pain,
Interactions
and menstrual irregularity. In addition,other craniosacral
Patients who take monoamine oxidase inhibitors practitioners have reported benefits for eye dysfunction,
(MAO inhibitors) should be aware that the co-adminis- dyslexia, depression, motor coordination difficulties,
tration of products containing dextromethorphan can temporomandibular joint dysfunction (TMD),hyperac-
cause dizziness, fainting, fever, nausea, and possibly tivity, colic, asthma in babies, floppy baby syndrome,
coma. Do not take dextromethorphan unless a physician whiplash, cerebral palsy, certain birth defects, and
permits the use of the two drugs together. other central nervous system disorders.
When dextromethorphan is taken with medicines
that cause drowsiness,this effect may be enhanced. Description
Origins
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
The first written reference to the movement of the
spinal nerves and its importance in life, clarity, and
Coughing and deep-breathing exercises see
“bringing quiet to the heart”is found in a 4,000-year-old
Chest physical therapy
text from China. Craniosacral work was referred to as
Coxsackievirus infections see Enterovirus “the art of listening.” Bone setters in the Middle Ages
also sensed the subtle movements of the body. They used
infections
these movements to help reset fracturesand dislocations
CPK test see Creatine kinase test and to treat headaches.
944 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypareht
larcasoinarC
In the early 1900s, the research of Dr. William
Sutherland,an American osteopathic physician,detailed WILLIAM SUTHERLAND
the movement of the cranium and pelvis. Before his (1873–1954)
research it was believed that the cranium was a solid
immovable mass. Sutherland reported that the skull is William Garner Sutherland studied osteopathy
actually made up of 22 separate and movable bones that under its founder, Andrew Taylor Still. Dr. Sutherland
are connected by layers of tissue. He called his work cra- made his own important discovery while examining the
nial osteopathy. Nephi Cotton,an American chiroprac- sutures of cranial bones the skull bones that protect the
tor and contemporary of Sutherland,called this approach brain. What he noticed is that the sutures were designed
craniology. The graduates of these two disciplines have for motion. Sutherland termed this motion the Breath of
Life.Through his experiments and research he deter-
refined and enhanced these original approaches and
mined that primary respiration was essential to all other
renamed their work as sacro-occipital technique,cranial
physiological functions.
movement therapy,or craniosacral therapy.
When Sutherland developed his techniques for
Dr. John Upledger, an osteopathic physician, and
craniosacral therapy, he wanted it to serve as a vehicle
others at the Department of Biomechanics at Michigan for listening to the body’s rhythmic motions and treat the
State University, College of Osteopathic Medicine patterns of inertia when those motions become congest-
learned of Sutherland’s research and developed it further. ed. He believed that the stresses—any physical or emo-
He researched the clinical observations of various osteo- tional trauma—created an imbalance in the body that
pathic physicians. This research provided the basis for needed correction to restore it to full health. The therapy
Upledger’s work that he named craniosacral therapy. is a hands-on method so that the therapist can feel the
subtleties of the patterns of movement and inertia.
Craniosacral therapy addresses the craniosacral sys- Sutherland felt that this was the way to encourage self-
tem. This system includes the cranium, spine, and healing and restoration of the body’s own mechanisms,
sacrum that are connected by a continuous membrane of taking a holistic approach to creating optimal health.
connective tissue deep inside the body, called the dura
The Craniosacral Therapy Educational Trust, based
mater. The dura mater also encloses the brain and the on Sutherland’s pioneering work, is located at 10 Norm-
central nervous system. Sutherland noticed that cerebral ington Close, Leigham Court Road, London SW16 2QS,
spinal fluid rises and falls within the compartment of the United Kingdom. The phone number is 07000 785778.
dura mata. He called this movement the primary respira-
tory impulse; today it is known as the craniosacral
rhythm (CSR) or the cranial wave.
The third technique is called myofascial release.
Craniosacral therapists can most easily feel the CSR
This is a manipulative form of bodywork that releases
in the body by lightly touching the base of the skull or
tension in the fascia or connective tissue of the body.
the sacrum. During a session,they feel for disturbances
This form of bodywork uses stronger touch.
in the rate,amplitude,symmetry,and quality of flow of
Upledger’s fourth technique is position of release.
the CSR. A therapist uses very gentle touch to balance
This involves following the client’s body into the posi-
the flow of the CSR. Once the cerebrospinal fluid moves
tions in which an injury occurred and holding it there.
freely,the body’s natural healing responses can function.
When the rhythm of the CSR suddenly stops the therapist
A craniosacral session generally lasts 30–90 min- knows that the trauma has been released.
utes. The client remains fully clothed and lays down on a
The last technique is somatoemotional release. This
massage table while the therapist gently assesses the
technique was developed by Upledger and is an offshoot
flow of the CSR. Upledger describes several techniques
of craniosacral therapy. It is used to release the mind and
which may be used in a craniosacral therapy session. The
body of the residual effects of trauma and injury that are
first is energy cyst release. “This technique is a hands-on
“locked in the tissues.”
method of releasing foreign or disruptive energies from
The cost of a session varies due to the length of time
the patient’s body. Energy cysts may cause the disruption
needed and the qualifications of the therapist. The cost
of the tissues and organs were they are located.” The
may be covered by insurance when the therapy is per-
therapist feels these cysts in the client’s body and gently
formed or prescribed by a licensed health care provider.
releases the blockage of energy.
Sutherland first wrote about a second practice called
Precautions
direction of energy. In this technique the therapist intends
energy to pass from one of his hands,through the patient, This gentle approach is extremely safe in most cases.
into the other hand. However, craniosacral therapy is not recommended in
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 945
Craniosacral
therapy
cases of acute systemic infections,recent skull fracture,
intracranial hemorrhage or aneurysm,or herniation of the Craniotomy
medulla oblongata (brain stem). Craniosacral therapy
Definition
does not preclude the use of other medical approaches.
Surgical removal of part of the skull to expose the
brain.
Side effects
Some people may experience mild discomfort after a
Purpose
treatment. This may be due to re-experiencing a trauma or
injury or a previously numb area may come back to life A craniotomy is the most commonly performed
and be more sensitive. These side effects are temporary. surgery for brain tumor removal. It may also be done to
remove a blood clot and control hemorrhage,inspect the
brain,perform a biopsy,or relieve pressure inside the skull.
Research and general acceptance
More than 40 scientific papers have been published Precautions
that document the various effects of craniosacral therapy.
Before the operation,the patient will have undergone
There are also 10 authoritative textbooks on this therapy.
diagnostic procedures such as computed tomography
The most notable scientific papers include Viola M. Fry-
scans(CT) or magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) scans
man’s work documenting the successful treatment of
to determine the underlying problem that required the
1,250 newborn children with birth defects. Edna Lay and
craniotomy and to get a better look at the brain’s structure.
Stephen Blood showed the effects on TMD, and John
Cerebral angiography may be used to study the blood
Wood documented results with psychiatric disorders.
supply to the tumor,aneurysm,or other brain lesion.
The American Dental Association has found craniosacral
therapy to be an effective adjunct to orthodontic work.
However,the conventional medical community has not Description
endorsed these techniques.
There are two basic ways to open the skull:
•a curving incision from behind the hairline,in front of
Resources
the ear,arching above the eye
BOOKS
•at the nape of the neck around the occipital lobe
Knaster,Mirka. Discovering the Body’s Wisdom.New York:
Bantam Books,1996. The surgeon marks with a felt tip pen a large square
Milne,Hugh. Heart of Listening:A Visionary Approach to flap on the scalp that covers the surgical area. Following
Craniosacral Work:Anatomy. Technique,Transcendence. this mark,the surgeon makes an incision into the skin as
2nd ed. Berkeley,CA:North Atlantic Books,1998. far as the thin membrane covering the skull bone.
Upledger,John E. “CranioSacral Therapy.”In Clinician’s Com-
Because the scalp is well supplied with blood,the sur-
plete Reference to Complementary and Alternative Medi-
geon will have to seal many small arteries. The surgeon
cine,ed. Donald Novey. St. Louis,MO:2000.
then folds back a skin flap to expose the bone.
Upledger,John E. Your Inner Physician and You:CranioSacral
Therapy Somatoemotional Release.Berkeley,CA:North Using a high speed hand drill or an automatic cran-
Atlantic Books,1991. iotome,the surgeon makes a circle of holes in the skull,
Upledger,John E. and John Vredevoogd. Craniosacral Thera- and pushes a soft metal guide under the bone from one
py.Seattle:Eastland Press,1983. hole to the next. A fine wire saw is then moved along the
guide channel under the bone between adjacent holes.
ORGANIZATIONS
The surgeon saws through the bone until the bone flap
Milne Institute Inc. P.O. Box 2716,Monterey,CA 93942-2716.
(831) 649-1825. Fax:(831) 649-1826. <milneinst@aol. can be removed to expose the brain.
com>. <http://www.milne institute.com>. After the surgery for the underlying cause is com-
Upledger Institute. 11211 Prosperity Farms Road,Palm Beach
pleted, the piece of skull is replaced and secured with
Gardens,FL 33410. (800) 233-5880. Fax:(561) 622-
pieces of fine,soft wire. Finally,the surgeon sutures the
4771. <http://www.upledger.com>.
membrane,muscle,and skin of the scalp.
OTHER
Milne,Hugh. A Client’s Introduction to Craniosacral Work.
Preparation
Pamphlet. Milne Institute.
Before the surgery,patients are usually given drugs
Linda Chrisman to ease anxiety,and other medications to reduce the risk
946 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ymotoinarC
of swelling,seizures,and infection after the operation. wires used to reattach the skull are permanent and
Fluids may be restricted, and a diuretic may be given require no further attention. The patient should avoid get-
before and during surgery if the patient has a tendency to ting the scalp wet until all the sutures have been
retain water. A catheter is inserted before the patient goes removed. A clean cap or scarf can be worn until the hair
to the operating room. grows back.
The scalp is shaved in the operating room right
before surgery; this is done so that any small nicks in the Risks
skin won’t have a chance to become infected before the
Accessing the area of the brain that needs repair may
operation.
damage other brain tissue. Therefore,the procedure car-
ries with it some risk of brain damage that could leave
Aftercare
the patient with some loss of brain function. The surgeon
Oxygen,painkillers,and drugs to control swelling performing the operation can give the patient an assess-
and seizures are given after the operation. Codeine may ment of the risk of his or her particular procedure.
be given to relieve the headache that may occur as a
result of stretching or irritation of the nerves of the scalp
Normal results
that happens during the craniotomy. Some type of
drainage from the head may be in place,depending on While every patient’s experience is different depend-
the reason for the surgery. ing on the reason for the surgery,age,and overall health,
if the surgery has been successful, recovery is usually
Patients are usually out of bed within a day and out
rapid because of the good supply of blood to the area.
of the hospital within a week. Headache and painfrom
the scalp wound can be controlled with medications.
Abnormal results
The bandage on the skull should be changed regular-
ly. Sutures closing the scalp will be removed, but soft Possible complications after craniotomy include:
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 947
Craniotomy
Bone is sawed
Scalp incisions
at base of flap
Cut joining
burr holes
Figure A Figure B
A craniotomy is the most commonly performed surgery for brain tumor removal.There are two basic ways to open the skull:
a curving incision from behind the hairline in front of the ear and at the nape of the neck (figure A).To reach the brain,the
surgeon uses a hand drill to make holes in the skull,pushing a soft metal guide under the bone.The bone is sawed through
until the bone flap can be removed to expose the brain (figure B).(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
Description
KEY TERMS
A small amount of blood is drawn and used for labo-
ratory analysis.
Craniotome—A type of surgical drill used to oper-
ate on the skull. It has a self-controlled system that
Preparation
stops the drill when the bone is penetrated.
Physical activity may cause a rise in CK levels,
especially the CK-III fraction. Therefore,patients should
not engage in strenuous physical activity the day of the
•swelling of the brain test. The patient should report any recent injections,falls,
•excessive intracranial pressure or bruisesthat have occurred,as these may elevate CK
levels as well.
•infection
•seizures
Aftercare
Resources No aftercare is required,except to keep the puncture
BOOKS site clean while it heals.
Smeltzer,Suzanne,and Brenda Bare. “Management of Patients
with Neurological Dysfunction.”In Brunner and Sud-
Risks
darth’s Textbook of Medical/Surgical Nursing.7th ed.
Philadelphia:J. B. Lippincott Co.,1992. There are no risks to this test beyond the very slight
The Surgery Book:An Illustrated Guide to 73 of the Most Com- risk of infection at the puncture site.
mon Operations.Ed. Robert M. Younson,et al. New York:
St. Martin’s Press,1993.
Normal results
Carol A. Turkington
In females,total CK should be 10–79 units per liter
(U/L). In males,total CK should be 17–148 U/L. CK lev-
els are reduced in the first half of pregnancy, and
increased in the second half. CK levels are elevated in
newborns.
Creatine kinase test
The distribution of isoenzymes should be:
Definition
•CK-I:0%
The creatine kinase test measures the blood levels of
•CK-II:0–5%
certain muscle and brain enzyme proteins.
•CK-III:95–100%
Purpose
Abnormal results
Creatine kinase (CK or CPK) is an enzyme (a type
of protein) found in muscle and brain. Normally,very lit- Elevation of CK-I may be seen in stroke, extreme
tle CK is found circulating in the blood. Elevated levels shock,or brain tumor.
indicate damage to either muscle or brain; possibly from
Elevation of CK-II is seen after a myocardial infarc-
a myocardial infarction (heart attack),muscle disease,
tion. It begins to rise three to six hours after the heart
or stroke.
attack, and may peak within 24 hours. It should then
There are three types,or isoforms,of CK: return to normal. For this reason,it is a useful marker for
•CK-I, or BB, is produced primarily by brain and recent myocardial infarction, but not for one which
smooth muscle. occurred more than a day before the test.
•CK-II,or MB,is produced primarily by heart muscle. Elevation of CK-III indicates skeletal muscle dam-
age. This may occur from normal exercise, trauma, or
•CK-III,or MM,is produced primarily by skeletal muscle.
muscle disease. CK levels may be very high early on in
muscular dystrophy, but may fall to normal later as
Precautions
muscle tissue is lost. Elevated CK is also seen in myosi-
No special precautions are necessary, except in tis, myoglobinuria, toxoplasmosis, and trichinosis.
patients with a bleeding disorder. Hypothyroidismmay also cause elevated CK.
948 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tset
esanik
enitaerC
skeletal muscle contraction,the daily production of crea-
KEY TERMS tine,and the following product,creatinine,depends on
muscle mass,which fluctuates very little.
Skeletal muscles—Muscles which move the skele- Creatinine is excreted entirely by the kidneys,and
ton. All of the muscles under voluntary control are therefore is directly related to renal function. When the
skeletal muscles. kidneys are functioning normally,the serum creatinine
Smooth muscles—Muscles that surround the lin- level should remain constant and normal. Slight increas-
ings of the digestive system, airways, and circula- es in creatine levels can appear after meals, especially
tory system. after ingestion of large quantities of meat,and some diur-
nal variation may occur,with a low point at 7 A.M. and a
peak at 7 P.M. Serious renal disorders,such as glomeru-
lonephritis, pyelonephritis, and urinary obstruction,
will cause abnormal elevations.
Resources
The creatinine level is interpreted in conjunction
BOOKS
with another kidney function test called the Blood Urea
Corbett,Jane Vincent. Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Proce-
Nitrogen (BUN). The serum creatinine level has much
dures with Nursing Diagnoses.2nd ed. Los Altos,CA:
Appleton & Lange,1987. the same significance as the BUN but tends to rise later.
Because of this, determinations of creatinine help to
Richard Robinson chronicle a disease process. Generally,a doubling of cre-
atinine suggests a 50% reduction in kidney filtration rate.
Creatine phosphkinase test see Creatine
kinase test Preparation
The creatinine test requires a blood sample. It is rec-
ommended that the patient be fasting(nothing to eat or
drink) for at least eight hours before the test. The physi-
cian may also require that ascorbic acid (vitamin C),
Creatinine test barbiturates,and diureticsbe withheld for 24 hours.
Definition
Risks
Creatine is an important compound produced by the Risks for this test are minimal, but may include
body. It combines with phosphorus to make a high- slight bleeding from the blood-drawing site,faintingor
energy phosphate compound in the body. Creatine phos- feeling lightheaded after venipuncture, or hematoma
phate is used in skeletal muscle contraction. (blood accumulating under the puncture site).
Purpose Normal results
The creatinine test is used to diagnose impaired kid- Normal values can vary from laboratory to laborato-
ney function and to determine renal (kidney) damage. ry,but are generally in the following ranges:
•Adult female:0.5–1.1 mg/dL
Precautions •Adult male:0.6–1.2 mg/dL
A diet high in meat content can cause transient ele- •Adolescent:0.5–1.0 mg/dL
vations of serum creatinine. Some drugs that may •Child:0.3–0.7 mg/dL
increase creatinine values include gentamicin, cimeti-
•Infant:0.2–0.4 mg/dL
dine, heavy-metal chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., cis-
•Newborn:0.3–1.2 mg/dL
platin),and other drugs toxic to the kidneys,such as the
cephalosporins. Note that variations between sources for serum crea-
tinine normal ranges are greater than for other important
tests. For example,due to the greater amount of muscle
Description
mass generally present, males normally demonstrate
The creatinine test is used to measure the amount of higher creatinine levels than females. Also,because the
creatinine in the blood. Because creatinine is a nonpro- kidney filtration rate normally increases in pregnancy,
tein end-product of creatine phosphate,which is used in serum creatinine should be slightly less during such peri-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 949
Creatinine
test
called a spongioform degeneration that seems to be relat-
KEY TERMS ed to “mad cow disease.”
Glomerulonephritis—Glomerulonephritis is an
inflammation of the filtering units of the kidney Description
(glomeruli). The condition hinders removal of
Before 1995,Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease was little-
waste products, salt, and water from the blood-
known outside of the medical profession; even within it,
stream, leading to serious complications. It is the
many practitioners did not know much about it. Most
most common cause of renal failure.
doctors had never seen a case. With the recognition of a
Pyelonephritis—Pyelonephritis is an inflammation so-called “new variant”or simply variant form of CJD
of the kidney itself, usually caused by a bacterial with the strong possibility that those with it became
infection. In its most serious form, complications infected simply by eating contaminated beef, CJD has
can include high blood pressure (hypertension) become one of the most talked-about diseases in the
and renal failure. world. Additionally,the radical theory that the infectious
agent is a normal protein that has been changed in its
form has also sparked much interest.
ods. In older patients,creatinine is reduced because of First described in the first part of the twentieth cen-
decreased muscle mass. Similarly, other patients may tury independently by Cretzfeldt and Jakob, CJD is a
have creatinine levels in which muscle abnormalities neurodegenerative disease causing a rapidly progressing
must be taken into consideration,such as long-term cor- dementiaending in death,usually within eight months
ticosteroid therapy, high thyroid (hyperthyroidism), of the onset of symptoms. It is also a very rare disease,
muscular dystrophy,or paralysis. affecting only about one in every million in the popula-
tion through out the world. In the United States,CJD is
thought to affect about 250 people each year. CJD affects
Abnormal results
adults primarily between ages 50 and 75.
Two to 4 mg/dL indicate the presence of impairment
of renal function. Greater than 4 mg/dL indicates serious
impairment in renal function. Spongiform encephalopathies
The most obvious pathologic feature of CJD is the
Resources formation of numerous fluid-filled spaces in the brain
BOOKS (vacuoles) resulting in a sponge-like appearance. CJD is
Cahill,Mathew. Handbook of Diagnostic Tests.Springhouse, one of several human “spongiform encephalopathies,”
PA:Springhouse Corporation,1995. diseases that produce this characteristic change in brain
Jacobs,David S.,et al. Laboratory Test Handbook.4th ed. New tissue. Others are kuru; Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker
York:Lexi-Comp Inc.,1996. disease,a genetic predominantly characterized by cere-
Pagana,Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and bellar ataxia (a kind of movement disorder); and fatal
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis:Mosby,Inc.,1998.
familial insomnia,associated with progressive insomnia,
autonomic system disfunction,and weakness caused by
Janis O. Flores
motor system dysfunction.
Creeping eruption see Cutaneous larva Kuru was prevalent among the Fore people in Papua,
migrans New Guinea,and spread from infected individuals after
their deaths through the practice of ritual cannibalism,in
CREST syndrome see Scleroderma
which the relatives of the dead person honored him by
Cretinism see Hypothyroidism consuming his organs,including the brain. Discovery of
the infectious nature of kuru won the Nobel Prize for
Carleton Gadjusek in 1976. The incubation period for
kuru was between four to 30 years or more. While kuru
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease has virtually disappeared following the cessation of these
cannibalistic practices, several new cases continue to
Definition arise each year.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a transmissible, Cases of CJD have been grouped into three types:
rapidly progressing, fatal neurodegenerative disorder familial,iatrogenic,and sporadic.
950 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
bokaJ-tdlefztuerC
•Familial CJD,representing 5–15% of cases,is inherited at the end of their useful farm lives,and the use of their
in an autosomal dominant manner,meaning that either carcasses for feed,spread the infection rapidly and wide-
parent may pass along the disease to a child,who may ly. For at least a year after BSE was first recognized in
then develop CJD later in life. British herds, infected bovine remains continued to be
incorporated into feed,spreading the disease still further.
•Iatrogenic CJD occurs when a person is infected during
Although milk from infected cows has never been shown
a medical procedure, such as organ donation, blood
to pass the infectious agent,passage from infected moth-
transfusion,or brain surgery. The rise in organ dona-
er to calf may have occurred through unknown means.
tion has increased this route of transmission; grafts of
infected corneas and dura mater (the tissue covering the Beginning in 1988, the British government took
brain) have been shown to transmit CJD. Another steps to stop the spread of BSE, banning the use of
source is hormones concentrated from the pituitary bovine offal in feed and other products and ordering the
glands of cadavers,some of whom carried CJD,for use slaughter of infected cows. By then, the slow-acting
in people with growth hormone deficiencies. Iatrogenic agent had become epidemic in British herds. In 1992,it
infection from exposure to nerve-containing tissue rep- was diagnosed in over 25,000 animals (1% of the
resents a small fraction of all cases. The incubation British herd). By mid-1997,the cumulative number of
period between exposure to the infectious agent is very BSE cases in the United Kingdom had risen to more
long and is estimated to be from less than 10 to more than 170,000. The feeding ban did stem the tide of the
than 30 years. It remains unlikely,but not impossible, epidemic; however,the number of new cases each week
that blood from patients with CJD is infectious to oth- fell from a peak of 1,000 in 1993 to less than 300 two
ers by transfusion. years later.
•Sporadic CJD represents at least 85% of all cases. Spo- The export of British feed and beef to member coun-
radic cases have no identifiable source of infection. Death tries was banned by the European Union, but cases of
usually follows first symptoms within eight months. BSE had developed in Europe by then as well; however,
by mid-1997,only about 1,000 cases had been identified.
Animal forms and “mad cow disease” In 1989,the United States banned import of British beef
and began monitoring United States herds in 1990. To
Six forms of spongiform encephalopathies are
date,no BSE has been detected in the United States,and
known to occur in other mammals:scrapie in sheep,rec-
only one case has been reported in North America in a
ognized for more than 200 years; chronic wasting disease
cow imported to Canada from Great Britain.
in elk and mule deer in Wyoming and Colorado; trans-
missible mink encephalopathy; exotic ungulate
encephalopathy in some types of zoo animals; feline Variant CJD: The human equivalent of mad cow
spongiform encephalopathy in domestic cats; and bovine disease?
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cows.
From the beginning of the BSE epidemic,scientists
BSE was first recognized in Britain in 1986. Besides and others in Britain feared that BSE might jump species
the spongiform changes in the brain,BSE causes demen- again to infect humans who had consumed infected beef.
tia-like behavioral changes—hence the name “mad cow This,however,had never occurred in scrapie from sheep,
disease.” BSE was thought to be an altered form of a disease known from hundreds of years. In 1996, the
scrapie,transmitted to cows when they were fed sheep first report of this possibility occurred and this fear
offal (slaughterhouse waste) as part of their feed,but it is seemed to be realized with the first cases of a new variant
now thought to be more likely to be a primary cattle dis- of Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, termed nvCJD, now just
ease spread by contaminated feed. vCJD. Its victims are much younger than the 60–65 year
old average for CJD,and the time from symptom onset to
The use of slaughterhouse offal in animal feed has
death has averaged 12 months or more instead of eight.
been common in many countries and has been practiced
The disease appears to cause more psychiatric symptoms
for at least 50 years. The trigger for the BSE epidemic in
early on. EEG abnormalities characteristic of CJD are
Great Britain seems to have come in the early 1980s,
not typically seen in vCJD.
when the use of organic solvents for preparation of offal
was altered there. It is possible that these solvents had As of July 2001,the total number of human cases of
been destroying the agent called a prion,thereby prevent- vCJD is 102. It is of major concern that the number of
ing infection,and that the change in preparation proce- cases per year seems to be increasing by a factor of 1.35
dure opened the way for the agent to “jump species”and each year. Almost all the cases have been found in Great
cause BSE in cows that consumed scrapie-infected meal. Britain with three in France,one in Ireland,and one sus-
The slaughter of infected (but not yet visibly sick) cows pected in Hong Kong (who spent time in Great Britain).
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 951
Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease
Evidence is growing stronger that vCJD is in fact destroys the capacity to reproduce. However,when these
caused by BSE: same measures are applied to infected tissue from
spongiform encephalopathy victims, infectivity is not
•almost all of the cases so far have occurred in Great
destroyed. Furthermore,purification of infected tissue to
Britain,the location of the BSE epidemic.
concentrate the infectious fraction yields protein, not
•BSE injected into monkeys produces a disease very
nucleic acid. While it remains possible that some highly
similar to vCJD
stable nucleic acid remains hidden within the purified
•BSE and vCJD produce the same brain lesions after the protein,this is seemingly less and less likely as further
same incubation period when injected into laboratory experiments are done. The “prion hypothesis,” as it is
mice called,is now widely accepted,at least provisionally,by
most researchers in the field. The most vocal proponent
•brain proteins isolated from vCJD victims,but not from
of the hypothesis, Stanley Prusiner, was awarded the
the other forms of CJD,share similar molecular charac-
Nobel Prize in 1997 for his work in the prion diseases.
teristics with brain proteins of animals that died from
BSE A prion is an altered form of a normal brain protein.
The normal protein has a helical shape along part of its
Many researchers now treat the BSE-vCJD connec-
length. In the prion form,a sheet structure replaces the
tion as solidly established.
helix. According to the hypothesis, when the normal
Assuming that BSE is the source,the question that form interacts with the prion form, some of its helical
has loomed from the beginning has been is how many part is converted to a sheet, thus creating a new prion
people will eventually be affected. Epidemiological capable of transforming other normal forms. In this way,
models of infectious disease produce estimates ranging the disease process resembles crystallization more than
from less than one hundred (a level already broken) to typical viral infection,in which the virus commands the
tens of thousands or more,depending on the assumptions host’s cellular machinery to reproduce more of the virus.
used by the modelers. The incubation period of vCJD in Build-up of the sheet form causes accumulation of
humans is not known,nor are the genetic and environ- abnormal protein clumps and degeneration of brain cells,
mental risk factors that influence susceptibility,nor the which is thought to cause the disease.
quantity of infectious agent needed to cause the disease.
The brain protein affected by the prion,called PrP,is
It is estimated that between one and two million infected
part of the membrane of brain cells,but its exact function
cattle have been eaten by humans, most in the earliest
is unknown. It is composed of about 250 subunits,called
stages of the epidemic. Estimates cannot be based on the
amino acids, coded for by a gene on chromosome 20.
very few cases that have developed so far. These cases
Slight genetic differences,called polymorphisms,give
could represent the very few people with the right combi-
rise to two slightly different normal protein forms:sub-
nation of exposure and susceptibility to a relatively fast-
unit 129 is a “methionine”in one form,but is “valine”in
developing infection,or they could be the first few vic-
the other. A person may have all of one,all of the other,
tims of a slower-acting,more highly infectious agent.
or a mixture of the two,depending on their genetic inher-
itance. Both forms have the normal helical structure,and
Causes and symptoms function normally. However,susceptibility to prion con-
version is influenced by subunit 129: a person with a
Causes
mixture of forms is more resistant to conversion. All the
It is clear that Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is caused by cases of vCJD tested have had just methionine at 129.
an infectious agent, but it is not yet clear what type of Exposure to the infectious agent is, of course, still
agent that is. Originally assumed to be a virus,evidence required for disease development. Prion diseases are not
is accumulating that,instead,CJD is caused by a protein contagious in the usual sense,and transmission from an
called a prion (PREE-on,for “proteinaceous infectious infected person to another person requires direct inocula-
particle”) transmitted from victim to victim. The other tion of infectious material.
spongiform encephalopathies are also hypothesized to be
Familial CJD, on the other hand, does not require
due to prion infection.
exposure,but develops through the inheritance of other,
If this hypothesis is proved true,it would represent more disruptive mutations in the gene for the normal PrP
one of the most radical new ideas in biology since the protein. Researchers believe these mutations increase the
discovery of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). All infec- likelihood that the protein may more spontaneously
tious diseases,in fact all life,uses nucleic acids—DNA “flip”to the sheet form; once created,these can then con-
or ribonucleic acid (RNA)—to code the instructions vert other normal-form molecules. The other two inherit-
needed for reproduction. Inactivation of the nucleic acids ed human prion diseases, Gerstmann-Straussler-
952 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
bokaJ-tdlefztuerC
Scheinker disease and fatal familial insomnia, involve done to rule out other causes of dementia (as cell count,
different mutations in the same gene. chemical analysis,and other routine tests are normal in
CJD) and to identify elevated levels of marker proteins
The large majority of CJD cases are sporadic,mean-
known as 14-3-3. Another marker,neuron-specific eno-
ing they have no known route of infection or genetic link.
lase,may also be increased in CJD. CJD is conclusively
Causes of sporadic CJD are likely to be diverse and may
diagnosed after death by brain autopsy. Scientists are
include spontaneous genetic mutation,spontaneous pro-
investigating whether testing lymphatic tissue such as the
tein changes, or unrecognized exposure to infectious
tonsil may be an early tool in vCJD diagnosis. Addition-
agents. It is highly likely that future research will identi-
ally,recent studies have suggested that other blood tests
fy more risk factors associated with sporadic CJD.
may be useful as well.
Symptoms
Treatment
About one in four people with CJD begin their ill-
There is no cure for CJD, and no treatment that
ness with weakness, changes in sleep patterns, weight
slows the progression of the disease. Drug therapy and
loss, or loss of appetite or sexual drive. A person with
nursing care are aimed at minimizing psychiatric symp-
CJD may first complain of visual disturbances,including
toms and increasing patient comfort. However,the rapid
double vision, blurry vision, or partial loss of vision.
progression of CJD frustrates most attempts at treatment,
Some visual symptoms are secondary to cortical blind-
since decreasing cognitive function and more prominent
ness related to death of nerve cells in the occipital lobe of
behavioral symptoms develop so quickly. Despite the
the brain responsible for vision. This form of visual loss
generally grim prognosis, a few CJD patients progress
is unusual in that patients may be unaware that they are
more slowly and live longer than the average; for these
unable to see. These symptoms may appear weeks to
patients,treatment will be more satisfactory. Scientists
months before the onset of dementia.
are investigating whether some medicines that can
The most characteristic symptom of CJD is rapidly
“break” the abnormal protein form may be useful and
progressing dementia, or loss of mental function.
whether a vaccine could help.
Dementia is marked by:
•memory losses
Prognosis
•impaired abstraction and planning
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is invariably fatal, with
•language and comprehension disturbances death following symptom onset by an average of eight
months. About 5% of patients live longer than two years.
•poor judgment
Death from vCJD has averaged approximately 12
•disorientation
months after onset.
•decreased attention and increased restlessness
•personality changes and psychosis Prevention
•hallucinations There is no known way to prevent sporadic CJD,by
far the most common type. Not everyone who inherits
Muscle spasms and jerking movements, called
the gene mutation for familial CJD will develop the dis-
myoclonus,are also a prominent symptom of CJD. Bal-
ease, but at present, there is no known way to predict
ance and coordination disturbance (ataxia),is common in
who will and who won’t succumb. The incidence of
CJD,and is more pronounced in nvCJD. Stiffness,diffi-
iatrogenic CJD has fallen with recognition of its sources,
culty moving,and other features representing Parkinson’s
the development of better screening techniques for
disease are seen and can progress to akinetic mutism,
infected tissue,and the use of sterilization techniques for
which is a state of being unable to speak or move.
surgical instruments that inactivate prion proteins.
Strategies for prevention of vCJD are a controversial
Diagnosis
matter,as they involve a significant sector of the agricul-
CJD is diagnosed by a clinical neurological exam tural industry and a central feature of the diet in many
and electroencephalography(EEG),which shows char- countries. The infectious potential of contaminated meat
acteristic spikes called triphasic sharp waves. Magnetic is unknown, because the ability to detect prions within
resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography meat is limited. Surveillance of North American herds
scans (CT) should be done to exclude other forms of strongly suggests there is no BSE here,and strict regula-
dementia,and in CJD typically shows atrophy or loss of tions on imports of European livestock make future out-
brain tissue. Lumbar puncture, or spinal tap, may be breaks highly unlikely. Therefore,avoidance of all meat
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 953
Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease
chromosome 5. Individuals with this syndrome have
KEY TERMS unusual facial features, poor muscle tone(hypotonia),
small head size (microcephaly), and mental
Autosomal dominant inheritance—A pattern of retardation. A classic feature of the syndrome is the cat-
inheritance in which a trait will be expressed if the like cry made by infants with this disorder.
gene is inherited from either parent.
Encephalopathy—Brain disorder characterized by Description
memory impairment and other symptoms.
Dr. Jerome Lejeune first described cri du chat syn-
Iatrogenic—Caused by a medical procedure. drome in 1963. The syndrome is named for the cat-like
Nucleic acids—The cellular molecules DNA and cry made by infants with this genetic disorder. Cri du
RNA that act as coded instructions for the produc- chatmeans “cry of the cat”in French. This unusual cry is
tion of proteins and are copied for transmission of caused by abnormal development of the larynx (organ in
inherited traits. the throat responsible for voice production). Cri du chat
syndrome is also called “5p minus syndrome”because it
is caused by a deletion,or removal,of genetic material
from chromosome 5. The deletion that causes cri du chat
originating in North America,simply on grounds of BSE syndrome occurs on the short or “p”arm of chromosome
risk, is a personal choice unsupported by current data. 5. This deleted genetic material is vital for normal devel-
The ban on the export of British beef continues in coun- opment. Absence of this material results in the features
tries of the European Union,although some herds in these associated with cri du chat syndrome.
countries have developed low levels of infection as well. A high-pitched mewing cry during infancy is a classic
feature of cri du chat. Infants with cri du chat also typically
Resources have low birth weight,slow growth,a small head (micro-
cephaly) and poor muscle tone (hypotonia). Infants with cri
BOOKS
du chat may have congenital heart defects. Individuals with
Rampton,S. and J. C. Stauber. Mad Cow U.S.A.:Could the
cri du chat syndrome have language difficulties,delayed
Nightmare Happen Here?Common Courage Press,1997.
motor skill development,and mental retardation. Behav-
Ratzan,S. C.,ed. Mad Cow Crisis :Health and the Public
Good.New York:University Press,1998. ioral problems may also develop as the child matures.
It has been estimated that cri du chat syndrome
PERIODICALS
Haywood,A. M. “Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies.” occurs in one of every 50,000 live births. According to
New England Journal of Medicine337 (December 18, the 5p minus Society,approximately 50–60 children are
1997):1821-1828. born with cri du chat syndrome in the United States each
Prusiner,S. B. “Prion Disease and the BSE Crisis.”Science year. It can occur in all races and in both sexes.
278 (October 10,1997):245-251.
Prusiner,S. B.”The Prion Diseases.”Scientific American272
(January 1995):48-57. Causes and symptoms
ORGANIZATION Cri du chat is the result of a chromosome abnormali-
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Foundation. P.O. Box 611625, ty—a deleted piece of chromosomal material on chromo-
North Miami,FL 33261-1625. <http://members.aol.com/ some 5. In 90% of patients with cri du chat syndrome,
crjakob/contact.html>. the deletion is sporadic. This means that it happens ran-
The UK Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Surveillance Unit. <http:// domly and is not hereditary. If a child has cri du chat due
www.cjd.ed.ac.uk/index.htm>. to a sporadic deletion,the chance the parents could have
another child with cri du chat is 1%. In approximately
Larry I. Lutwick,MD
10% of patients with cri du chat, there is a hereditary
chromosomal rearrangement that causes the deletion. If a
parent has this rearrangement,the risk for them to have a
child with cri du chat is greater than 1%.
Cri du chat syndrome An abnormal larynx causes the unusual cat-like cry
made by infants that is a hallmark feature of the syndrome.
Definition
As children with cri du chat get older, the cat-like cry
Cri du chat syndrome occurs when a piece of chro- becomes less noticeable. This can make the diagnosis
mosomal material is missing from a particular region on more difficult in older patients. In addition to the cat-like
954 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
tahc
ud
irC
KEY TERMS
Aminocentesis—A procedure performed at 16–18 Chromosome—A microscopic thread-like structure
weeks of pregnancy in which a needle is inserted found within each cell of the body and consists of a
through a woman’s abdomen into her uterus to complex of proteins and DNA. Humans have 46
draw out a small sample of the amniotic fluid from chromosomes arranged into 23 pairs. Changes in
around the baby. Either the fluid itself or cells from either the total number of chromosomes or their
the fluid can be used for a variety of tests to obtain shape and size (structure) may lead to physical or
information about genetic disorders and other med- mental abnormalities.
ical conditions in the fetus.
Congenital—Refers to a disorder that is present at
birth.
Centromere—The centromere is the constricted
region of a chromosome. It performs certain func- Deletion—The absence of genetic material that is
tions during cell division. normally found in a chromosome. Often, the genet-
ic material is missing due to an error in replication
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS)—A procedure of an egg or sperm cell.
used for prenatal diagnosis at 10–12 weeks gesta- Hypotonia—Reduced or diminished muscle tone.
tion. Under ultrasound guidance a needle is insert-
Karyotyping—A laboratory procedure in which
ed either through the mother’s vagina or abdomi-
chromosomes are separated from cells, stained and
nal wall and a sample of cells is collected from
arranged so that their structure can be studied
around the early embryo. These cells are then test-
under the microscope.
ed for chromosome abnormalities or other genetic
diseases. Microcephaly—An abnormally small head.
cry,individuals with cri du chat also have unusual facial Cri du chat syndrome can be detected before birth if
features. These facial differences can be very subtle or the mother undergoes amniocentesistesting or chorionic
more obvious. Microcephaly (small head size) is common. villus sampling(CVS). This testing would only be recom-
During infancy many patients with cri du chat do not gain mended if the mother or father is known to have a chro-
weight or grow normally. Approximately 30% of infants mosome rearrangement,or if they already have a child
with cri du chat have a congenital heart defect. Hypotonia with cri du chat syndrome.
(poor muscle tone) is also common,leading to problems
with eating and slow, but normal, development. Mental Treatment
retardation is present in all patients with cri du chat,but
Currently,there is no cure for cri du chat syndrome.
the degree of mental retardation varies between patients.
Treatment consists of supportive care and developmental
therapy.
Diagnosis
Prognosis
During infancy, the diagnosis of cri du chat syn-
drome is strongly suspected if the characteristic cat-like Individuals with cri du chat have a 10% mortality
cry is heard. If a child has this unusual cry or other fea- during infancy due to complications associated with con-
tures seen in cri du chat syndrome,chromosome testing genital heart defects,hypotonia,and feeding difficulties.
should be performed. Chromosome analysis provides the Once these problems are controlled, most individuals
definitive diagnosis of cri du chat syndrome and can be with cri du chat syndrome have a normal lifespan. The
performed from a blood test. Chromosome analysis,also degree of mental retardation can be severe. However,a
called “karyotyping,”involves staining the chromosomes recent study suggested that the severity is somewhat
and examining them under a microscope. In some cases affected by the amount of therapy received.
the deletion of material from chromosome 5 can be easi-
ly seen. In other cases,further testing must be performed. Resources
FISH (fluorescence in-situ hybridization) is a special
BOOKS
technique that detects very small deletions. The majority
Gardner,R. J. McKinlay,and Grant R. Sutherland. Chromo-
of the deletions that cause cri du chat syndrome can be some Abnormalities and Genetic Counseling.New York:
identified using the FISH technique. Oxford University Press,1996.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 955
Cri
du
chat
syndrome
Jones,Kenneth. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Mal- large intestine (the colon). However,inflammation may
formation.5th ed. Philadelphia:W.B. Saunders Company, also occur in other areas of the gastrointestinal tract,
1997. affecting the mouth,esophagus,or stomach. Crohn’s dis-
Rimoin,David,Michael Connor,and Reed Pyeritz. Emery and ease differs from ulcerative colitis,the other major type
Rimoin’s Principles and Practice of Medical Genetics,
of IBD,in two important ways:
3rd ed. New York:Churchill Livingstone,1996.
•The inflammation of Crohn’s disease may be discontin-
PERIODICALS
uous,meaning that areas of involvement in the intestine
Van Buggenhout,G. J. C. M.,et al. “Cri du Chat Syndrome:
may be separated by normal, unaffected segments of
Changing Phenotype in Older Patients.”American Jour-
intestine. The affected areas are called “regional enteri-
nal of Medical Genetics90 (2000):203-215.
tis,”while the normal areas are called “skip areas.”
ORGANIZATIONS
•The inflammation of Crohn’s disease affects all the lay-
5p- Society. 7108 Katella Ave. #502,Stanton,CA 90680. (888)
ers of the intestinal wall,while ulcerative colitis affects
970-0777. <http://www.fivepminus.org>.
Alliance of Genetic Support Groups. 4301 Connecticut Ave. only the lining of the intestine.
NW,Suite 404,Washington,DC 20008. (202) 966-5557.
Also,ulcerative colitis does not usually involve the
Fax:(202) 966-8553. <http://www.geneticalliance.org>.
small intestine; in rare cases it involves the terminal
Cri du Chat Society. Dept. of Human Genetics,Box 33,MCV
ileum (so-called “backwash”ileitis).
Station,Richmond VA 23298. (804) 786-9632.
Cri du Chat Syndrome Support Group. <http://www.cridchat. In addition to inflammation,Crohn’s disease causes
u-net.com>. ulcerations,or irritated pits in the intestinal wall. These
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD). P.O. Box pits occur because the inflammation has made areas of
8923,New Fairfield,CT 06812-8923. (203) 746-6518 or
tissue shed.
(800) 999-6673. Fax:(203) 746-6481. <http://www.rare
diseases.org>. Crohn’s disease may be diagnosed at any age,
although most diagnoses are made between the ages of
OTHER
15–35. About 0.02–0.04% of the population suffers from
OMIM—Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.<http://www.
this disorder, with men and women having an equal
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/>.
chance of being stricken. Whites are more frequently
affected than other racial groups,and people of Jewish ori-
Holly Ann Ishmael,MS
gin are between three and six times more likely to suffer
from IBD. IBD runs in families; an IBD patient has a 20%
Crib death see Sudden infant death
chance of having other relatives who are fellow sufferers.
syndrome
Crohn’s disease is a chronic disorder. While the
symptoms can be improved,a patient will not be com-
pletely cured of the underlying disease.
Crohn’s disease Causes and symptoms
Definition The cause of Crohn’s disease is unknown. No infec-
tious agent (virus,bacteria,or fungi) has been identified
Crohn’s disease is a type of inflammatory bowel dis-
as the cause of Crohn’s disease. Still,some researchers
ease (IBD),resulting in swelling and dysfunction of the
have theorized that some type of infection may have
intestinal tract.
originally been responsible for triggering the immune
system, resulting in the continuing and out-of-control
Description cycle of inflammation that occurs in Crohn’s disease.
Other evidence for a disorder of the immune system
Crohn’s disease involves inflammation of the intes-
includes the high incidence of other immune disorders
tine,especially the small intestine. Inflammation refers
that may occur along with Crohn’s disease.
to swelling,redness,and loss of normal function. There
is evidence that the inflammation is caused by various The first symptoms of Crohn’s disease include diar-
products of the immune system that attack the body itself rhea,fever,abdominal pain,inability to eat,weight loss,
instead of helpfully attacking a foreign invader (a virus and fatigue. Some patients have severe pain that mimics
or bacteria,for example). The inflammation of Crohn’s appendicitis. It is rare, however, for patients to notice
disease most commonly affects the last part of the ileum blood in their bowel movements. Because Crohn’s disease
(a section of the small intestine),and often includes the severely limits the ability of the affected intestine to absorb
956 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
s’nhorC
the nutrients from food,a patient with Crohn’s disease can
have signs of malnutrition,depending on the amount of
intestine affected and the duration of the disease.
The combination of severe inflammation,ulceration,
and scarring that occurs in Crohn’s disease can result in
serious complications, including obstruction, abscess
formation,and fistula formation.
An obstruction is a blockage in the intestine. This
obstruction prevents the intestinal contents from passing
beyond the point of the blockage. The intestinal contents
“back up,” resulting in constipation, vomiting, and
intense pain. Although rare in Crohn’s disease (because
of the increased thickness of the intestinal wall due to
swelling and scarring), a severe bowel obstruction can
result in an intestinal wall perforation (a hole in the intes-
tine). Such a hole in the intestinal wall would allow the
intestinal contents,usually containing bacteria,to enter
the abdomen. This complication could result in a severe,
life-threatening infection.
Abcess formation is the development of a walled-off
pocket of infection. A patient with an abscess will have
bouts of fever,increased abdominal pain,and may have a
lump or mass that can be felt through the wall of the
abdomen.
Fistula formation is the formation of abnormal chan-
nels. These channels may connect one area of the intes-
tine to another neighboring section of intestine. Fistuals
may join an area of the intestine to the vagina or bladder,
or they may drain an area of the intestine through the
skin. Abscesses and fistulas commonly affect the area
around the anus and rectum (the very last portions of the
colon allowing waste to leave the body). These abnormal
connections allow the bacteria that normally live in the
intestine to enter other areas of the body,causing poten- •painful,red bumps on the skin
tially serious infections.
•inflammation of several eye areas
Patients suffering from Crohn’s disease also have a
•inflammation of the liver,gallbladder,and/or the chan-
significant chance of experiencing other disorders. Some
nels (ducts) that carry bile between and within the liver,
of these may relate specifically to the intestinal disease,
gallbladder,and intestine
and others appear to have some relationship to the imbal-
anced immune system. The faulty absorption state of the The chance of developing cancerof the intestine is
bowel can result in gallstones and kidney stones. greater than normal among patients with Crohn’s dis-
Inflamed areas in the abdomen may press on the tube that ease,although this chance is not as high as among those
drains urine from the kidney to the bladder (the ureter). patients with ulcerative colitis
Ureter compression can make urine back up into the kid-
ney, enlarge the ureter and kidney, and can potentially
Diagnosis
lead to kidney damage. Patients with Crohn’s disease
also frequently suffer from: Diagnosis is first suspected based on a patient’s
•arthritis (inflammation of the joints) symptoms. Blood tests may reveal an increase in certain
types of white blood cells,an indication that some type
•spondylitis (inflammation of the vertebrae,the bones of
of inflammation is occurring in the body. The blood tests
the spine)
may also reveal anemia and other signs of malnutrition
•ulcers of the mouth and skin due to malabsorption (low blood protein; variations in
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 957
Crohn’s
disease
A barium x-ray showing the colon of a patient with Crohn’s
disease where the large and small intestines join (bottom
left).(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
X rays can be helpful for diagnosis, and also for
KEY TERMS determining how much of the intestine is involved in the
disease. For these x rays,the patient must either drink a
Abscess—A walled-off pocket of pus caused by chalky solution containing barium,or receive a barium
infection. enema(a solution that is administered through the rec-
tum). Barium helps to “light up”the intestine,allowing
Endoscope—A medical instrument that can be
more detail to be seen on the resulting x rays.
passed into an area of the body (the bladder or
intestine, for example) to allow examination of While Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis are sim-
that area. The endoscope usually has a fiber-optic ilar,they are also very different. Although it can be diffi-
camera that allows a greatly magnified image to cult to determine whether a patient has Crohn’s disease
be shown on a television screen viewed by the or ulcerative colitis,it is important to make every effort
operator. Many endoscopes also allow the opera- to distinguish between these two diseases. Because the
tor to retrieve a small sample (biopsy) of the area long-term complications of the diseases are different,
being examined to more closely view the tissue treatment will depend on careful diagnosis of the specific
under a microscope. IBD present.
Fistule—An abnormal channel that creates an
open passageway between two structures that do Treatment
not normally connect.
Treatments for Crohn’s disease try to reduce the
Gastrointestinal tract—The entire length of the underlying inflammation, the resulting malabsorption/
digestive system, running from the stomach, malnutrition, the uncomfortable symptoms of crampy
through the small intestine, large intestine, and out abdominal pain and diarrhea,and the possible complica-
the rectum and anus. tions (obstructions,abscesses,and fistulas).
Immune system—The body system responsible for Inflammation can be treated with a drug called sul-
producing various cells and chemicals that fight fasalazine. Sulfasalazine is made up of two parts. One part
infection by viruses, bacteria, fungi, and other for- is related to the sulfa antibiotics; the other part is a form
eign invaders. In autoimmune disease, these cells of the anti-inflammatory chemical,salicylic acid (related
and chemicals turn against the body itself. to aspirin). Sulfasalazine is not well absorbed from the
Inflammation—The result of the body’s attempts intestine,so it stays mostly within the intestine,where it is
to fight off and wall off an area that is infected. broken down into its components. It is believed that the
Inflammation results in the classic signs of red- salicylic acid component actively treats Crohn’s disease by
ness, heat, swelling, and loss of function. fighting inflammation. Some patients do not respond to
sulfasalazine, and require steroid medications (such as
Obstruction—A blockage.
prednisone). Steroids,however,must be used carefully to
Ulceration—A pitted area or break in the continu- avoid the complications of these drugs, including
ity of a surface such as skin or mucous membrane. increased risk of infection and weakening of bones (osteo-
porosis). Some very potent immunosuppressive drugs,
which interfere with the products of the immune system
and can hopefully decrease inflammation,may be used for
the amount of calcium,potassium,and magnesium pre- those patients who do not improve on steroids.
sent in the blood; changes in certain markers of liver
A new drug called infliximab (Remicade) appears to
function). Stool samples may be examined to make sure
be a powerful treatment for Crohn’s disease,particularly
that no infectious agent is causing the diarrhea, and to
for patients who have not responded well to other forms
see if the waste contains blood.
of treatment. Infliximab is administered through infusion,
During an endoscopic exam,a doctor passes a flexi- and consists of a monoclonal antibody that interferes with
ble tube with a tiny,fiber-optic camera device through the inflammatory process mediated by tumor necrosis
the rectum and into the colon. The doctor can then care- factor-alpha (TNF-a). Patients taking infliximab seem to
fully examine the lining of the intestine for signs of be able to decrease their use of steroid medications,and
inflammation and ulceration that might suggest Crohn’s require fewer surgical interventions. Furthermore,inflix-
disease. A tiny sample (a biopsy) of the intestine can imab is the first medication approved for treating fistulas.
also be taken through the endoscope,and the tissue will Unfortunately, infliximab can only be used on a short-
be examined under a microscope for evidence of term basis,because its interference with TNF-a activity
Crohn’s disease. can also predispose patients to serious infection. More
958 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
s’nhorC
research is needed to try to harness the benefits of inflix- Crohn’s patients will die of their disease,primarily due
imab,while avoiding the potential complications. to massive infection.
Serious cases of malabsorption/malnutrition may
need to be treated by providing nutritional supplements. Resources
These supplements must be in a form that can be
BOOKS
absorbed from the damaged, inflamed intestine. Some
Glickman,Robert. “Inflammatory Bowel Disease:Ulcerative
patients find that certain foods are hard to digest,includ- Colitis and Crohn’s Disease.”In Harrison’s Principles of
ing milk,large quantities of fiber,and spicy foods. When Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:
patients are suffering from an obstruction,or during peri- McGraw-Hill,1998.
ods of time when symptoms of the disease are at their Long,James W. The Essential Guide to Chronic Illness.New
worst,they may need to drink specially formulated,high- York:Harper Perennial,1997.
calorie liquid supplements. Those patients who are Saibil,Fred. Crohn’s Disease and Ulcerative Colitis.Buffalo,
NY:Firefly Books,1997.
severely ill may need to receive their nutritionthrough a
needle inserted in a vein (intravenously), or even by a PERIODICALS
tiny tube (a catheter) inserted directly into a major vein Peppercorn,Mark A.,and Susannah K. Gordon. “Making Sense
in the chest. of a Mystery Ailment:Inflammatory Bowel Disease.”Har-
vard Health Letter22,no. 2 (December 1996):4+.
A number of medications are available to help
Sachar,David. “Maintenance Strategies in Crohn’s Disease.”
decrease the cramping and pain associated with Crohn’s
Hospital Practice31,no. 1 (January 15,1996):99+.
disease. These include loperamide, tincture of opium,
and codeine. Some fiber preparations (methylcellulose or ORGANIZATION
psyllium) may be helpful,although some patients do not Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation of America,Inc. 386 Park
Avenue South,17th Floor,New York,NY 10016-8804.
tolerate them well.
(800) 932-2423.
The first step in treating an obstruction involves gen-
eral attempts to decrease inflammation with sul- Rosalyn S. Carson-DeWitt
fasalazine, steroids, or immunosuppressive drugs. A
patient with a severe obstruction will have to stop taking Cromolyn see Antiasthmatic drugs
all food and drink by mouth, allowing the bowel to
Cross-eye see Strabismus
“rest.”Abscesses and other infections will require antibi-
otics. Surgery may be required to repair an obstruction Cross-gender identification see Gender
that does not resolve on its own,to remove an abscess,or
identity disorder
to repair a fistula. Such surgery may involve the removal
of a section of the intestine. In extremely severe cases of
Crohn’s disease that do not respond to treatment, a
patient may need to have the entire large intestine
removed (an operation called a colectomy). In this case,
a piece of the remaining small intestine is pulled through Croup
an opening in the abdomen. This bit of intestine is fash-
Definition
ioned surgically to allow a special bag to be placed over
it. This bag catches the body’s waste, which no longer Croup is a common childhood ailment. Typically,it
can be passed through the large intestine and out of the arises from a viral infection of the larynx (voice box) and
anus. This opening,which will remain in place for life,is is associated with mild upper respiratory symptoms such
called an ileostomy. as a runny nose and cough. The key symptom is a harsh
barking cough. Croup is usually not serious, and most
children recover within a few days. In a small percentage
Prognosis
of cases,a child develops breathing difficulties and may
Crohn’s disease is a life-long illness. The severity of need medical attention.
the disease can vary,and a patient can experience periods
of time when the disease is not active and he or she is
Description
symptom-free. However,the complications and risks of
Crohn’s disease tend to increase over time. Well over At one time,the term croup was primarily associated
60% of all patients with Crohn’s disease will require with diphtheria,a life-threatening respiratory infection.
surgery, and about half of these patients will require Owing to widespread vaccinations, diphtheria has
more than one operation over time. About 5–10% of all become rare in the United States, and croup currently
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 959
Croup
refers to a mild viral infection of the larynx. Croup is also comfortable and calm to the best degree possible,because
known as laryngotracheitis,a medical term that describes crying can make symptoms seem worse. Humid air can
the inflammation of the trachea (windpipe) and larynx. help a child with croup feel more comfortable. Recom-
mended methods include sitting in a steamy bathroom
Parainfluenza viruses are the typical root cause of
with the hot water running or using a cool-water vaporizer
the infection,but influenza(flu) and cold viruses may
or humidifier. Breathing may also be eased by going out-
sometimes be responsible. All of these viruses are highly
side into cooler air. The child should drink frequently in
contagious and easily transmitted between individuals
order to stay well hydrated. To treat any fever,the child
via sneezing and coughing. Children between the ages of
may be given an appropriate dose of acetaminophen
three months and six years are usually affected,with the
(like Tylenol). Antihistamines and decongestants are
greatest incidence at one to two years of age. Croup can
ineffective in treating croup. Children under the age of 18
occur at any time of the year,but it is most typical during
should not be given aspirin,as it may causeReye’s syn-
early autumn and winter. The characteristic harsh bark-
drome,a life-threatening disease of the brain.
ing of a croupy cough can be very distressing, but it
rarely indicates a serious problem. Most children with If the child does not respond to home treatment,
croup can be treated very effectively at home; however, medical treatment at a doctor’s office or an emergency
1–5% may require medical treatment. room could be necessary. Based on the severity of symp-
toms and the response to treatment,the child may need to
Croup may sometimes be confused with more seri-
be admitted to a hospital.
ous conditions,such as epiglottitisor bacterial tracheitis.
These ailments arise from bacterial infection and must For immediate symptom relief,epinephrine may be
receive medical treatment. administered as an inhaled aerosol. Effects last for up to
two hours,but there is a possibility that symptoms may
return. For that reason,the child is kept under supervi-
Causes and symptoms
sion for three or more hours. Another effective drug is a
Owing to an upper respiratory viral infection, the glucocorticoid,dexamethasone. This drug requires more
larynx and trachea may become inflamed or swollen. The time to take effect,but is longer lasting. It can be admin-
hallmark sign of croup is a harsh, barking cough. This istered orally or as an injection. Another glucocorticoid,
cough may be preceded by one to three days of symp- budesonide,has been used outside the United States for
toms that resemble a slight cold. A croupy cough is often treating croup. It is administered as an inhaled aerosol
accompanied by a runny nose, hoarseness, and a low and has been shown to be effective; however, it is not
fever. When the child inhales,there may be a raspy or available as a treatment option in the United States.
high-pitched noise,called stridor,owing to the narrowed
Of the 1–5% of children requiring medical treat-
airway and accumulated mucus. In the presence of stri-
ment,approximately 1% need respiratory support. Such
dor,medical attention is required.
support involves intubation (inserting a tube into the tra-
However, the airway rarely narrows so much that chea) and oxygen administration.
breathing is impeded. Symptoms usually abate complete-
ly within a few days. Medical treatment may be sought if
Alternative treatment
the child’s symptoms do not respond to home treatment.
Botanical/herbal medicines can be helpful in healing
Emergency medical treatment is required immediate-
the cough that is commonly associated with croup. Sev-
ly if the child has difficulty breathing,swallowing,or talk-
eral herbs to consider for cough treatment include
ing; develops a high fever (103°F/39.4°C or more); seems
aniseed (Pimpinella anisum),sundew (Drosera rotundi-
unalert or confused; or has pale or blue-tinged skin.
folia), thyme (Thymus vulgaris), and wild cherry bark
(Prunus serotina). Homeopathic medicine can be very
Diagnosis effective in treating cases of croup. Choosing the correct
remedy (a common choice is aconite or monkshood,
Croup is diagnosed based on the symptoms. If
Aconitum napellus) is always the key to the success of
symptoms are particularly severe,or do not respond to
this type of treatment.
treatment,an x ray of the throat area is done to assess the
possibility of epiglottitis or other blockage of the airway.
Prognosis
Croup is a temporary condition and children typically
Treatment
recover completely within three to six days. Children can
Home treatment is the usual method of managing experience one or more episodes of croup during early
croup symptoms. It is important that the child is kept childhood; however,croup is rarely a dangerous condition.
960 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
puorC
when a person has symptoms of this protein or is being
KEY TERMS evaluated for one of the associated diseases.
Diphtheria—A serious, frequently fatal, bacterial Purpose
infection that affects the respiratory tract. Vaccina-
Cryoglobulin clumps in cold temperatures. This
tions given in childhood have made diphtheria
physical characteristic causes people with cryoglobulin
very rare in the United States.
to have symptoms during cold weather: blanching,
Epiglottitis—A bacterial infection that affects the
numbness,and painin their fingers or toes (Raynaud’s
epiglottis. The epiglottis is a flap of tissue that pre-
phenomenon); bleeding into the skin (purpura); and pain
vents food and fluid from entering the trachea. The
in joints (arthralgia). People with these symptoms or any
infection causes it to become swollen, potentially
other symptoms that appear in cold weather should be
blocking the airway. Other symptoms include a
tested for cryoglobulin.
high fever, nonbarking cough, muffled voice, and
Diseases that cause the body to make extra or abnor-
an inability to swallow properly (possibly indicat-
mal proteins are often associated with cryoglobulin.
ed by drooling).
These diseases include cancers involving white blood
Glucocorticoid—A hormone that helps in diges-
cells,infections,autoimmune disorders,and rheuma-
tion of carbohydrates and reduces inflammation.
toid diseases.
Larynx—Commonly called the voice box, it is the
This test provides information about the cause of
area of the trachea that contains the vocal cords.
symptoms in a person who already has a disease process.
Stridor—The medical term used to describe the It doesn’t diagnose a specific disease or monitor the
high-pitched or rasping noise made when air is course of a disease.
inhaled.
Trachea—Commonly called the windpipe, it is the Precautions
air pathway that connects the nose and mouth to
This test is not a screening test for disease in a per-
the lungs.
son without symptoms.
Description
Prevention
Laboratory testing for cryoglobulin is based on the
Croup is caused by highly transmissible viruses. fact that cryoglobulin clumps when cooled and dissolves
Similar to other common childhood ailments,prevention when warmed. The test is done on a person’s serum (the
is not applicable. yellow liquid part of blood that separates from the cells
after the blood clots). The serum is kept warm from the
Resources time drawn until the cells and the serum are separated in
the laboratory. The serum is placed at 33.8°F (1°C) for
PERIODICALS
one to seven days. If there is clumping,cryoglobulins are
Folland,David S. “Treatment of Croup:Sending Home an
present. The amount of cryoglobulins is determined by
Improved Child and Relieved Parents.”Postgraduate
measuring the amount of clumping. Negative tests are
Medicine101,no. 3 (Mar. 1997):271.
Pappas,Diane E.,Gregory F. Hayden,and J. Owen Hendley. checked through seven days.
“Epiglottitis and Croup:Keys to Therapy at Home and in Additional testing is done to find out what kind of
the Hospital.”Consultant37,no. 4 (Apr. 1997):857.
cryoglobulin protein is present. There are three kinds of
cryoglobulin,each associated with different diseases.
Julia Barrett
The test,also called the cold sensitivity antibodies
test,is covered by insurance when medically necessary.
Results are usually available the following day.
Cryoglobulin test
Preparation
Definition
This test requires 15–20 mL of blood. A healthcare
Cryoglobulin is an abnormal blood protein associat- worker ties a tourniquet on the person’s upper arm,
ed with several diseases. Testing for cryoglobulin is done locates a vein in the inner elbow region, and inserts a
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 961
Cryoglobulin
test
Cryosurgery see Cryotherapy
KEY TERMS
Cryoglobulin—An abnormal blood protein associ-
ated with several diseases. It is characterized by its
tendency to clump in cold temperatures.
Cryotherapy
Definition
Cryotherapy is a technique that uses an extremely
needle into that vein. Vacuum action draws the blood
cold liquid or instrument to freeze and destroy abnormal
through the needle into an attached tube. Collection of
skin cells that require removal. The technique has been in
the sample takes only a few minutes. The blood must be
use since the turn of the century,but modern techniques
kept warm,at body temperature,until the laboratory can
have made it widely available to dermatologists and pri-
separate the cells from the serum.
mary care doctors. The technique is also called
cryosurgery.
Aftercare
Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture
Purpose
site or the person may feel dizzy or faint. Pressure to the
puncture site until the bleeding stops reduces bruising. Cryotherapy can be employed to destroy a variety of
Warm packs to the puncture site relieve discomfort. benign skin growths,such as warts,pre-cancerous lesions
(such as actinic keratoses),and malignant lesions (such as
Normal results basal cell and squamous cell cancers). The goal of
cryotherapy is to freeze and destroy targeted skin growths
Negative or absent.
while preserving the surrounding skin from injury.
Abnormal results
Precautions
If the person has cryoglobulin,the amount is report-
ed. Larger amounts of cryoglobulin are associated with Cryotherapy is not recommended for certain areas of
cancers or abnormalities involving white blood cells, the body because of the danger of destruction of tissue or
moderate amounts are associated with autoimmune dis- unacceptable scarring. These areas include: skin that
orders and rheumatoid diseases,and smaller amounts are overlies nerves,the corners of the eyes,the fold of skin
associated with infections. between the nose and lip,the skin surrounding the nos-
trils,and the border between the lips and the rest of the
The type of cryoglobulin is also reported. Type I
face. Lesions that are suspected or known to be malig-
cryoglobulin,also called monoclonal cryoglobulinemia,
nant melanomashould not be treated with cryotherapy,
is found in cancers or abnormalities of white blood cells.
but should instead be removed surgically. Similarly,basal
Type II,also called mixed cryoglobulinemia,is associat-
cell or squamous cell carcinomas that have reappeared at
ed with autoimmune disorders,rheumatoid diseases,and
the site of a previously treated tumor should also be
infections,particularly chronic hepatitis B.
removed surgically. If it remains unclear whether a
The physician must interpret the cryoglobulin result growth is benign or malignant,a sample of tissue should
along with other test results and the patient’s clinical be removed for analysis (biopsy) by a pathologist before
condition and medical history. any attempts to destroy the lesion with cryotherapy. Care
should be taken in people with diabetes or certain circula-
Resources tion problems when cryotherapy is considered for
growths located on their lower legs,ankles,and feet. In
BOOKS
these patients,healing can be poor and the risk of infec-
A Manual of Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests.5th ed. Ed.
tion can be higher than for other patients.
Francis Fishback. Philadelphia:Lippincott,1996.
Mayo Medical Laboratories. Interpretive Handbook.
Rochester,MN:Mayo Medical Laboratories,1997. Description
Pagana,Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis:Mosby,Inc.,1998. There are three main techniques to performing
cryotherapy. In the simplest technique,usually reserved
Nancy J. Nordenson for warts and other benign skin growths, the physician
962 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yparehtoyrC
will dip a cotton swab or other applicator into a cup con-
taining a “cryogen,”such as liquid nitrogen,and apply it KEY TERMS
directly to the skin growth to freeze it. At a temperature of
-320°F (-196°C),liquid nitrogen is the coldest cryogen Actinic keratosis—A crusty, scaly pre-cancerous
available. The goal is to freeze the skin growth as quickly skin lesion caused by damage from the sun. Fre-
as possible,and then let it thaw slowly to cause maximum quently treated with cryotherapy.
destruction of the skin cells. A second application may be
Basal cell cancer—The most common form of skin
necessary depending on the size of the growth. In another
cancer; it usually appears as one or several nod-
cryotherapy technique,a device is used to direct a small
ules having a central depression. It rarely spreads
spray of liquid nitrogen or other cryogen directly onto the
(metasticizes), but is locally invasive.
skin growth. Freezing may last from five to 20 seconds,
depending on the size of the lesion. A second freeze-thaw Cryogen—A substance with a very low boiling
cycle may be required. Sometimes, the physician will point, such as liquid nitrogen, used in cryotherapy
insert a small needle connected to a thermometer into the treatment.
lesion to make certain the lesion is cooled to a low Melanoma—The most dangerous form of skin
enough temperature to guarantee maximum destruction. cancer. It should not be treated with cryotherapy,
In a third option,liquid nitrogen or another cryogen is cir- but should be removed surgically instead.
culated through a probe to cool it to low temperatures.
Squamous cell cancer—A form of skin cancer that
The probe is then brought into direct contact with the skin
usually originates in sun-damaged areas or pre-
lesion to freeze it. The freeze time can take two to three
existing lesions; at first local and superficial, it
times longer than with the spray technique.
may later spread to other areas of the body.
Preparation
Extensive preparation prior to cryotherapy is not
dates for other surgical procedures. As with other surgi-
required. The area to be treated should be clean and dry,
cal procedures,there is some risk of scarring,infection,
but sterile preparation is not necessary. Patients should
and damage to underlying skin and tissue. These risks
know that they will experience some painat the time of
are generally minimal in the hands of experienced users
the freezing,but local anesthesia is usually not required.
of cryotherapy.
The physician may want to reduce the size of certain
growths,such as warts,prior to the cryotherapy proce-
dure,and may have patients apply salicylic acid prepara- Normal results
tions to the growth over several weeks. Sometimes,the Some redness, swelling, blistering and oozing of
physician will pare away some of the tissue using a fluid are all common results of cryotherapy. Healing time
device called a curette or a scalpel. can vary by the site treated and the cryotherapy technique
used. When cryogen is applied directly to the growth,
healing may occur in three weeks. Growths treated on the
Aftercare
head and neck with the spray technique may take four to
Redness,swelling,and the formation of a blister at the six weeks to heal; growths treated on other areas of the
site of cryotherapy are all expected results of the treatment. body may take considerably longer. Cryotherapy boasts
A gauze dressing is applied and patients should wash the high success rates in permanently removing skin growths;
site three or four times daily while fluid continues to ooze even for malignant lesions such as squamous cell and
from the wound,usually for five to 14 days. A dry crust basal cell cancers,studies have shown a cure rate of up to
then forms that falls off by itself. Woundson the head and 98%. For certain types of growths,such as some forms of
neck may take four to six weeks to heal,but those on the warts,repeat treatments over several weeks are necessary
body,arms,and legs can take longer. Some patients experi- to prevent the growth’s return.
ence pain at the site following the treatment. This can usu-
ally be eased with acetaminophen (Tylenol), though in
Abnormal results
some cases a stronger pain reliever may be required.
Although cryotherapy is a relatively low risk proce-
dure,some side effects may occur as a result of the treat-
Risks ment. They include:
Cryotherapy poses little risk and can be well-tolerat- •Infection. Though uncommon,infection is more likely
ed by elderly and other patients who are not good candi- on the lower legs where healing can take several months.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 963
Cryotherapy
•Pigmentary changes. Both hypopigmentation (lighten- raw fruit. Cryptococcosis is a rare disease in healthy
ing of the skin) and hyperpigmentation(darkening of individuals, but is the most common fungal infection
the skin) are possible after cryotherapy. Both generally affecting people with AIDS.
last a few months,but can be longer lasting.
People with Hodgkin’s disease or who are taking
•Nerve damage. Though rare,damage to nerves is possi- large doses of drugs that suppress the functioning of the
ble, particularly in areas where they lie closer to the immune system (corticosteroids,chemotherapydrugs)
surface of the skin,such as the fingers,the wrist,and are also more susceptible to cryptococcal infection.
the area behind the ear. Reports suggest this will disap- Cryptococcosis is also called cryptococcal meningitis
pear within several months. (when the brain is infected), Busse-Buschke disease,
European blastomycosis,torular meningitis,or torulosis.
Resources
BOOKS Causes and symptoms
Lynch,Peter J.,and W. Mitchell Sams Jr. Principles and Prac-
Once the cryptococcal fungus reaches the lungs,
tice of Dermatology.2nd ed. New York:Churchill Living-
three things can happen. The immune system can heal
stone,1996.
Roenigk,Randall K.,and Henry H. Roenigk Jr. Roenigk and the body without medical intervention,the disease can
Roenigk’s Dermatologic Surgery:Principles and Prac- stay localized in the lungs,or it can spread throughout
tice.New York:Marcel Dekker,1996. the body. In healthy people with normally functioning
immune systems,the body usually heals itself,and the
PERIODICALS
infected person notices no symptoms and has no compli-
Jester,David M. “Cryotherapy of Dermal Abnormalities.”Pri-
cations (asymptomatic). The disease does not spread
mary Care24 (June 1997):269-280.
from one person to another.
Young,R.,and R. Sinclair. “Practical Cryosurgery.”Australian
Family Physician26 (Sept. 1997):1045-1047. Cryptococcosis is an opportunistic infection that
puts people with immune system diseases at higher risk
ORGANIZATIONS
of developing more serious forms of the disease. In the
American Academy of Dermatology. 930 N. Meacham Road,
P.O. Box 4014,Schaumburg,IL 60168-4014. (847) 330- United States,6–10% of all patients with AIDS get cryp-
0230. <http://www.aad.org>. tococcosis.
American Society for Dermatologic Surgery. 930 N. Meacham
If the body does not heal itself,the fungus begins to
Road,P.O. Box 4014,Schaumburg,IL 60168-4014. (847)
grow in the lungs and form nodules that can be seen on
330-9830. <http://www.asds-net.org>.
chest x rays. In the early stages of infection,an individ-
ual usually only exhibits symptoms of a respiratory
Richard H. Camer
infection, such as a dry cough, so the disease is rarely
diagnosed.
The fungus can remain dormant in the lungs and
produce an active infection later if the immune system is
Cryptococcosis weakened. If the disease becomes active, it can cause
cryptococcal pneumonia in the lungs. Unfortunately,
Definition however,cryptococcal pneumonia has symptoms similar
to other pneumonias (cough, chest pain, difficulty
Cryptococcosis is an infection caused by inhaling
breathing), making it difficult to accurately diagnose.
the fungus Cryptococcus neoformans. It is one of the dis-
The infection can spread to other parts of the body,par-
eases most often affecting AIDSpatients. Cryptococco-
ticularly the brain and central nervous system.
sis may be limited to the lungs, but frequently spreads
throughout the body. Although almost any organ can be Most patients are not diagnosed as having crypto-
infected,the fungus is often fatal if it infects the nervous coccosis until they show signs of cryptococcal meningi-
system where it causes an inflammation of the mem- tis,or infection of the membranes surrounding the brain
branes covering the brain and spinal cord (meningitis). and spinal cord. Symptoms appear gradually over a peri-
od of two to four weeks. Fever and headache are the
most common symptoms, occurring in about 85% of
Description
patients. Nausea,vomiting,unwanted weight loss,and
The fungus causing cryptococcus,C. neoformans,is fatigue are also common. Other symptoms seen in
found worldwide in soil contaminated with pigeon or 25–30% of patients are blurred vision,stiff neck,aver-
other bird droppings. It has also been found on unwashed sion to light,and seizures. Since the symptoms of classic
964 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisoccocotpyrC
meningitis,such as stiff neck and aversion to light,do not
occur in many patients, diagnosis is often delayed. In
addition to meningitis, inflammation of the brain
(encephalitis) and brain lesions called cryptococcomas
or tortulomas can also develop.
In addition to the brain,the cryptococcal infection
can spread to the kidneys,bone marrow,heart,adrenal
glands, lymph nodes, urinary tract, blood, and skin.
Often times preceding the development of cryptococcal
meningitis,painless rashesand lesions that mimic other
skin diseases, such as molluscum contagiosum, may
develop. A small percentage of patients with brain infec-
tions show infections in other organs as well.
Diagnosis
Physicians who regularly work with AIDS patients
have the most experience in diagnosing cryptococcosis.
effects,such as kidney toxicity and lower concentrations
The preferred methods of diagnosis use simple and very
of an important blood component called hemoglobin.
accurate blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tests that
This medication can also cause fever,chills,nausea and
detect the presence of an antigen produced by the fungus.
vomiting,diarrhea,headache,and muscle aches. Treat-
The cerebrospinal fluid test is generally more sensitive to
ment is generally given intravenously during a hospital
detecting the meningitis form of the infection. CSF is
stay and continues until the patient is stable or improving
collected during a procedure called a lumbar puncture,
(no more than two to three weeks). 5-flucytosine is given
during which an anesthetic is applied to a small area of
orally. Patients may also receive other medication to
the back near the spine and a needle is used to withdraw
minimize the side effects from these drugs.
a sample of cerebrospinal fluid from the space between
the vertebrae and the spinal cord. Once obtained,a small Amphotericin B, with or without 5-flucytosine, is
amount of ink (called India ink) is added to a sample of given for several weeks until the patient is stable, after
CSF or a sample prepared from skin lesions. If the fun- which the patient receives oral fluconazole (Diflucan).
gus is present,it will become visible when the ink binds Fluconazole is a broad-spectrum antifungal drug with few
to the capsule or covering that surrounds the fungus. serious side effects. Patient with AIDS must continue tak-
Faster results are obtained with the India ink test,but it is ing fluconazole for the rest of their lives to prevent a
less accurate than the blood test (75–85% accuracy com- relapse of cryptococcosis. Sometimes fluconazole is
pared to 99% accuracy with the blood test) because some given to patients with advanced AIDS as a preventative
strains are not visible using this method. Antigen tests (prophylactic) measure.
are routinely recommended for non-symptomatic
Because of the high cost of fluconazole,the manu-
patients with advanced AIDS.
facturer of the drug, Pfizer, has established a financial
Another way to diagnose cryptococcosis is to cul- assistance plan to make the drug available at lower cost
ture a sample of sputum,tissue from a lung biopsy,or to those who meet certain criteria. Patients needing this
CSF in the laboratory to isolate the fungus. Cultures are drug should ask their doctors about this program.
also done to assess the effectiveness of treatment.
Chest x rays are useful in assessing lung damage and
Prognosis
may reveal a single mass or multiple distinct nodules,but
the x ray alone does not lead to a definitive diagnosis of Untreated cryptococcosis is always fatal. The acute
cryptococcosis. mortality rate for patients with AIDS is 10–25%. Most
deaths are attributable to cryptococcal meningitis and
occur within two weeks after diagnosis. For AIDS
Treatment
patients who do not receive continued suppressive thera-
Once cryptococcosis is diagnosed,treatment begins py (fluconazole),the relapse rate is 50–60% within six
with amphotericin B (Fungizone),sometimes in combi- months and a shortened life expectancy. Once the crypto-
nation with 5-flucytosine (Ancobon). Amphotericin B is coccosis infection has been successfully treated,individ-
a powerful fungistatic drug with potentially toxic side uals may be left with a variety of neurologic symptoms,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 965
Cryptococcosis
This lesion appearing on this person’s body is due to expo-
sure of the C.neoformansfungus.(Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Adrenal gland—A pair of organs located above the Hodgkin’s disease—A disease that causes chronic
kidneys. The outer tissue of the gland produces the inflammation of the lymph nodes, spleen, liver and
hormones epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepi- kidneys. It is also called malignant lymphoma.
nephrine, while the inner tissue produces several
Hydrocephalus—Build-up of fluid around the brain.
steroid hormones.
Immunocompromised—A state in which the
Amphotericin B (Fengizone)—An antifungal med- immune system is suppressed or not functioning
ication, prescribed for topical or systemic use in properly.
treating fungal infections.
India ink test—A diagnostic test used to detect the
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the cyptococcal organism C.neoformans. A dye, called
immune system in response to a specific foreign India ink, is added to a sample of CSF fluid, and if
protein or particle called an antigen. the fungi is present, they will become visible as the
dye binds to the capsule surrounding the fungus.
Antigen—A foreign protein or particle capable of
Lumbar puncture—Also called a spinal tap, a pro-
eliciting an immune response.
cedure in which a thin needle is used to withdraw a
Asymptomatic—Persons who carry a disease but sample of cerebrospinal fluid for diagnostic purpos-
who do not exhibit symptoms of the disease are es from the area surrounding the spine.
said to be asymptomatic.
Meningitis—Inflammation of the membranes cover-
Biopsy—The removal of a tissue sample for diag- ing the brain and spinal cord called the meninges.
nostic purposes. Molluscum contagiosum—A disease of the skin and
mucuous membranes, caused by a poxvirus and
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)—The clear fluid that sur-
found all over the world.
rounds the spinal cord and brain and acts as a
shock absorber. Opportunistic infection—An infection that is nor-
mally mild in a healthy individual, but which takes
Corticosteroids—A group of hormones produced advantage of an ill person’s weakened immune sys-
naturally by the adrenal gland or manufactured syn- tem to move into the body, grow, spread, and cause
thetically. They are often used to treat inflammation. serious illness.
Examples include cortisone and prednisone.
Pneumonia—Inflammation of the lungs, typically
Encephalitis—Inflammation of the brain. caused by a virus, bacteria, or other organism.
such as weakness,headache,and hearing or visual loss. National Aids Clearinghouse. 800-458-5231.
In addition, fluid may accumulate around the brain National Aids Hotline. 800-342-AIDS.
(hydrocephalus). Project Inform. 205 13th Street,#2001,San Francisco,CA
94103. (800) 822-7422. <http://www.projinf.org>.
Prevention
OTHER
The best way to prevent cryptococcosis is to stay free of Powderly,William G. “Cryptococcosis.”Journal of the Inter-
national Association of Physicians in AIDS Care.July
HIV infection. People with suppressed immune systems
1996 <http://www.iapac.org/diseases/fungi/cocc.html>.
should try to stay away from areas contaminated with pigeon
“Project Inform Cryptococcal Infections Fact Sheet.”Project
or other bird droppings,such as the attics of old buildings,
Inform.21 May 1996 <http://www.projinf.org>.
barns,and areas under bridges where pigeons roost.
Tish Davidson
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS Cryptococcus neoformans infection see
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., Cryptococcosis
NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435,(404) 639-3311.
<http://www.cdc.gov>. Cryptorchidism see Undescended testes
966 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisoccocotpyrC
bile duct infection also occurs and causes symptoms sim-
Cryptosporidiosis ilar to gallbladder attacks. Eighty percent or more of
those with infection of the bile ducts die from the dis-
Definition ease. The lungs and pancreas are also sometimes
involved. Cryptosporidiaare just one cause of the diar-
Cryptosporidiosis refers to infection by the spore-
rhea wasting syndrome in AIDS,which results in severe
forming protozoan known as Cryptosporidia. Protozoa are
weight loss and malnutrition.
a group of parasites that infect the human intestine,and
include the better known Giardia. Cryptosporidiawas first
identified in 1976 as a cause of disease in humans. Diagnosis
This is based on either finding the characteristic
Description cysts in stool specimens, or on biopsy of an infected
organ,such as the intestine.
Cryptosporidiaare normally passed in the feces of
infected persons and animals in the form of cysts. The
cysts can remain in the ground and water for months,and Treatment
when ingested produce symptoms after maturing in the
The first aim of treatment is to avoid dehydration.
intestine and the bile ducts. When viewed under the
Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS) or intravenous fluids
microscope,they appear as small bluish-staining round
may be needed. Medications used to treat diarrhea by
bodies. Most common sources of infection are other
decreasing intestinal motility (Anti-Motility Agents),
humans,water supplies,or reservoirs. These are contam-
such as loperamide or diphenoxylate,are also useful,but
inated by animals that defecate in these areas. An out-
should only be used with the advice of a physician.
break in Milwaukee in 1993 in which over 400,000 per-
Treatment aimed directly at Cryptosporidiais only
sons were affected was traced to the city’s water supply.
partially effective, and rarely eliminates the organism.
Cysts of Cryptosporidia are extremely resistant to the
The medication most commonly used is paromomycin
disinfectants that are commonly used in most water treat-
(Humatin),but others are presently under evaluation.
ment plants and are incompletely removed by filtration.
Most persons who experience significant symptoms
Prognosis
have an altered immune system,and suffer from diseases
such as AIDS and cancer. However, as shown in the Cryptosporidiararely cause a serious disease in per-
Milwaukee outbreak,even those with normal immunity sons with normal immune systems. Replacement of fluids
can experience symptoms. is all that is usually needed. On the other hand,those with
altered immune systems often suffer for months to years.
Paramomycin and other drugs have been able to improve
Causes and symptoms
symptoms in over half of those treated. Unfortunately,
Cysts of Cryptosporidiamature in the intestine and many organisms are resistant,and recurrence is frequent.
bile ducts within three to five days of ingestion. As noted,
large-scale infections from contaminated water supplies
Prevention
has been documented. However,human to human trans-
The best way to prevent cryptosporidiosis is to mini-
mission (such as occurs in day care centers or through
mize exposure to cysts from infected humans and ani-
sexual behavior) is also an important cause.
mals. Proper hand washing technique,especially in day
Many individuals can be infected without any ill-
care centers,is recommended.
ness,but the major symptom is diarrhea,which is often
watery and incapacitating. Dehydration, low-grade
Resources
fever,nausea,and abdominal cramps are frequent.
BOOKS
In those with a normal immune system, the disease
Davis,Charles E. “Laboratory Diagnosis of Parasitic Infec-
usually lasts about 10 days. For patients with altered immu-
tion.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed.
nity (immunocompromised), the story is quite different,
Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
with diarrhea becoming chronic,debilitating,and even fatal. Liu,Leo X.,and Peter F. Weller. “Therapy for Parasitic Infec-
tions.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed.
Complications Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Nash,Theodore E.,and Peter F. Weller. “Cryptosporidiosis.”In
Dehydration and malnutrition are the most com- Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony
mon effects of infection. In about 20% of AIDS patients, S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 967
Cryptosporidiosis
troenterology Clinics of North America(June 1997):259-
KEY TERMS 290.
Vakil,Nimish B.,et al. “Biliary Cryptosporidiosis in HIV-
Infected People after the Waterborne Outbreak of Cryp-
Anti-motility medications—Medications such as
tosporidiosis in Milwaukee.”New England Journal of
loperamide (sold as Imodium), dephenoxylate
Medicine334,no. 1 (1996):19.
(sold as Lomotil), or medications containing
codeine or narcotics that decrease the ability of ORGANIZATIONS
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd.,
the intestine to contract. This can worsen the con-
NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435,(404) 639-3311.
dition of a patient with dysentery or colitis.
<http://www.cdc.gov>.
Cyst—A protective sac that includes either fluid or
OTHER
the cell of an organism. The cyst enables many
“Cryptosporidiosis.”Centers for Disease Control.<http://
organisms to survive in the environment for long
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/crypto/crypto.htm>.
periods of time without need for food or water.
Vakil,Nimish B.,et al. “Biliary Cryptosporidiosis in HIV-
Immunocompromised—A change or alteration of Infected People after the Waterborne Outbreak of Cryp-
the immune system that normally serves to fight tosporidiosis in Milwaukee.”New England Journal of
off infections and other illnesses. This can involve Medicine Online.<http://content.nejm.org>.
changes in antibodies that the body produces
(hygogammaglobulinemia), or defect in the cells David Kaminstein,MD
that partake in the immune response. Diseases
such as AIDS and cancer exhibit changes in the C-section see Cesarean section
body’s natural immunity.
Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS)—A liquid CSF analysis see Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
preparation developed by the World Health Orga- analysis
nization that can decrease fluid loss in persons
with diarrhea. Originally developed to be pre-
pared with materials available in the home, com-
mercial preparations have recently come into use.
Parasite—An organism that lives on or in another
CT-guided biopsy
and takes nourishment (food and fluids) from that
organism. Definition
Protozoa—Group of extremely small single cell
Computed tomography (CT) is a process that images
(unicellular) or acellular organisms that are found
anatomic information from a cross-sectional plane of the
in moist soil or water. They tend to exist as para-
body. Biopsy is the process of taking a sample of tissue
sites, living off other life forms.
from the body for analysis. CT is commonly used in
Spore—A resistant form of certain species of bac- biopsies to provide images that help guide the tools or
teria, protozoa, and other organisms. equipment necessary to perform the biopsy to the appro-
priate area of the body.
Purpose
Owen,Robert L. “Cryptosporidia.”In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s
CT is used in the process of performing a biopsy,
Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feldman,et
such as a needle biopsy,in order to guide the needle to
al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
the site of the biopsy and to provide rapid and precise
Weller,Peter F. “Protozoal and Helminthic Infection:General
Consideration.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Med- localization of the needle. CT enables imaging of areas
icine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw- that are normally beyond visible boundaries. This
Hill,1997. enables the physician to see the target area clearly and
help to ensure that the tissue being removed is from the
PERIODICALS
target lesion.
Heyworth,Martin F. “Parasitic Diseases in Immunocompro-
mised Hosts.”Gastrointestinal Clinics of North America:
Parasitic Diseases of the Liver and Intestines(Sept. Precautions
1996):691-707.
Lew,Edward A.,Machael A. Poles,and Douglas T. Dieterich. The patient that suffers from claustrophobia will
“Diarrheal Disease Associated with HIV Infection.”Gas- want to discuss this with their physician. This procedure
968 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yspoib
dediug-TC
White,C.S.,C.A. Meyer,and P. A. Templeton. “CT Fluo-
KEY TERMS roscopy for Throacic Interventional Procedures.”Radio-
logic Clinics of North America38 (March 2000).
White,C.S.,et. al. “Transbronchial Needle Aspiration:Guid-
Lesion—A pathologic change in tissues.
ance with CT Fluoroscopy.”Chest118 (December 2000).
Malignancy—A locally invasive and destructive
growth. Kim A. Sharp
CT-myelogram see Myelography
CT scan see Computed tomography scans
involves the patient being placed into the CT scanner,typ-
ically a small,enclosed area. Depending on the specific
type of biopsies being performed,certain anesthetics will
be used,so discuss drug allergieswith your physician.
Description Culture-fair test
CT can assist in providing more enhanced images of
Definition
a suspicious lesion. It helps to determine whether a
tumor is truly solitary or not. CT can characterize the A culture-fair test is a test designed to be free of cul-
tumor and aid in the estimation of malignancy. tural bias,as far as possible,so that no one culture has an
advantage over another. The test is designed to not be
influenced by verbal ability,cultural climate,or educa-
Preparation
tional level.
Since there are many different types of biopsies,you
should follow the instructions from your physician to
Purpose
prepare for your CT-guided biopsy. Patients who suffer
from claustrophobia should discuss their concerns with The purpose of a culture-fair test is to eliminate any
the physician. In some cases,medicine can be given that social or cultural advantages, or disadvantages, that a
will relax the patient during the procedure. person may have due to their upbringing. The test can be
administered to anyone,from any nation,speaking any
Risks language. A culture-fair test may help identify learning
or emotional problems. The duration of the test varies for
CT-guided biopsy does not increase the risk of the
the individual types of tests available, but the time is
biopsy any more than any other radiologic imaging such
approximately between 12–18 minutes per section (a test
as x ray.
usually has two to four sections).
A culture-fair test is often administered by employ-
Normal results ers in order to determine the best location for new
employees in a large company. The wide variety of cul-
Because the area being biopsied,as well as the spe-
ture-fair tests availiable allows the administrator to
cific type of biopsy procedure can vary,results will vary.
select which area is most vital, whether it be general
Before undergoing the procedure,notification procedure
intelligence,knowledge of a specific area,or emotional
should be clearly defined.
stability.
Resources
Precautions
BOOKS
Stedman’s Medical Dictionary.27th ed. Philadelphia:Lippin- There is doubt as to whether any test can truly be
cot Williams & Wilkins,2000. culturally unbiased or can ever be made completely fair
Tierney,Lawrence,et. al. Current Medical Diagnosis and to all persons independent of culture. There are no other
Treatment.Los Altos:Lange Medical Publications,2001. precautions.
PERIODICALS
Garpestad,E.,et. al. “CT Fluoroscopy Guidance for Trans- Description
bronchial Needle Aspiration.”Chest119 (February 2001).
Shaffer,K. “Role of Radiology for Imaging and Biopsy of Soli- A culture-fair test is a non-verbal paper-pencil test
tary Pulmonary Nodules.”Chest116 (December 1999). that can be administered to patients as young as four
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 969
Culture-fair
test
years old. The patient only needs the ability to recognize
shapes and figures and perceive their respective relation- Cushing’s syndrome
ships. Some examples of tasks in the test may include:
Definition
•completing series
Cushing’s syndrome is a relatively rare endocrine
•classifying
(hormonal) disorder resulting from excessive exposure to
•solving matrices the hormone cortisol. The disorder,which leads to a vari-
•evaluating conditions ety of symptoms and physical abnormalities, is most
commonly caused by taking medications containing the
The culture-fair test is also often referred to as a cul-
hormone over a long period of time. A more rare form of
ture-free test or unbiased test. There are many variations
the disorder occurs when the body itself produces an
of the test including class, economic, and intelligence
excessive amount of cortisol.
tests. The threading theme among the various tests is
their design to be culturally unbiased.
Description
Preparation The adrenals are two glands,each of which is perched
on the upper part of the two kidneys. The outer part of the
The only preparation necessary to administer the test
gland is known as the cortex; the inner part is known as the
is pre-ordered materials and a quiet and secluded loca-
medulla. Each of these parts of the adrenal gland is respon-
tion for the duration of the test.
sible for producing different types of hormones. Regulation
of hormone production and release from the adrenal cortex
Aftercare
involves the pituitary gland,a small gland located at the
Post-test treatment depends on the results of the test base of the brain. After the hypothalamus (the part of the
and the specifics of the individual patient. Any further brain containing secretions important to metabolic activi-
treatment is best prescribed by the doctor. ties) sends “releasing hormones”to the pituitary gland,the
pituitary secretes a hormone called adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH). The ACTH then travels through the
Risks
bloodstream to the adrenal cortex,where it encourages the
There are no risks associated with the culture-fair production and release of cortisol (sometimes called the
test. “stress”hormone) and other adrenocortical hormones.
Cortisol,a very potent glucocorticoid—a group of
Normal results adrenocortical hormones that protects the body from
stressand affect protein and carbohydrate metabolism—
The results can be compared to the key that comes
is involved in regulating the functioning of nearly every
with the purchase of a culture-fair test. All results should
type of organ and tissue in the body,and is considered to
be compared to the included key.
be one of the few hormones absolutely necessary for life.
Cortisol is involved in:
Abnormal results
•complex processing and utilization of many nutrients,
The results can be compared to the key that comes including sugars (carbohydrates),fats,and proteins
with the purchase of a culture-fair test. All results should •normal functioning of the circulatory system and the
be compared to the included key. heart
•functioning of muscles
Resources
•normal kidney function
BOOKS
•production of blood cells
Maddox,Taddy. Test,4th ed.Austin,Texas:Pro-Ed Inc.,1997.
Reber,Arthur S. The Penguin Dictionary of Psychology,1995. •normal processes involved in maintaining the skeletal
system
Michael Sherwin Walston
•proper functioning of the brain and nerves
Ronald Watson,PhD
•normal responses of the immune system
Cultures for sexually transmitted diseases
Cushing’s syndrome,also called hypercortisolism,
see Sexually transmitted diseases cultures has an adverse effect on all of the processes described
970 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
s’gnihsuC
above. The syndrome occurs in approximately 10 to 15
out of every one million people per year,usually striking
adults between the ages of 20 and 50.
Causes and symptoms
The most common cause of Cushing’s syndrome is
the long-term use of glucocorticoid hormones in medica-
tions. Medications such as prednisone are used in a num-
ber of inflammatory conditions. Such conditions include
rheumatoid arthritis,asthma,vasculitis,lupus,and a
variety of other autoimmune disorders in which the
body’s immune cells accidentally attack some part of the
body itself. In these disorders, the glucocorticoids are
used to dampen the immune response,thereby decreas-
ing damage to the body.
Cushing’s syndrome can also be caused by three dif-
ferent categories of disease:
•a pituitary tumor producing abnormally large quantities
of ACTH
•the abnormal production of ACTH by some source
other than the pituitary
•a tumor within the adrenal gland overproducing cortisol
Although it is rare, about two-thirds of endoge-
nous (occurring within the body rather than from a
source outside the body,like a medication) Cushing’s
syndrome is a result of Cushing’s disease. The term
“Cushing’s disease” refers to Cushing’s syndrome,
which is caused by excessive secretion of ACTH by a
pituitary tumor, usually an adenoma (noncancerous
tumor). The pituitary tumor causes increased growth of
the adrenal cortex (hyperplasia) and increased cortisol
production. Cushing’s disease affects women more over the upper back and the back of the neck (giving the
often than men. individual what has been called a “buffalo hump”)
Tumors in locations other than the pituitary can also •purple and pink stretch marks across the abdomen and
produce ACTH. This is called ectopic ACTH syndrome flanks
(“ectopic”refers to something existing out of its normal
•high blood pressure
place). Tumors in the lung account for more than half of
all cases of ectopic ACTH syndrome. Other types of •weak,thinning bones (osteoporosis)
tumors that may produce ACTH include tumors of the •weak muscles
thymus,the pancreas,the thyroid,and the adrenal gland.
•low energy
Nearly all adrenal gland tumors are benign (noncancer-
•thin,fragile skin,with a tendency toward both bruising
ous),although in rare instances a tumor may actually be
and slow healing
cancerous.
•abnormalities in the processing of sugars (glucose),
Symptoms of cortisol excess (resulting from med-
with occasional development of actual diabetes
ication or from the body’s excess production of the hor-
mone) include: •kidney stones
•weight gain •increased risk of infections
•an abnormal accumulation of fatty pads in the face (cre- •emotional disturbances,including mood swings,depres-
ating the distinctive “moon face” of Cushing’s syn- sion, irritability, confusion, or even a complete break
drome); in the trunk (termed “truncal obesity”); and with reality (psychosis)
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 971
Cushing’s
syndrome
Woman with Cushing’s syndrome.(Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced by permission.)
toms are still not specific to Cushing’s syndrome. Fol-
KEY TERMS lowing a review of the patient’s medical history,physical
examination,and routine blood tests,a series of more
Adenoma—A type of noncancerous (benign) sophisticated tests is available to achieve a diagnosis.
tumor that often involves the overgrowth of certain
cells of the type normally found within glands. 24-hour free cortisol test
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)—A pituitary This is the most specific diagnostic test for identify-
hormone that stimulates the cortex of the adrenal ing Cushing’s syndrome. It involves measuring the
glands to produce adrenal cortical hormones. amount of cortisol present in the urine over a 24-hour
Cortisol—A hormone secreted by the cortex of the period. When excess cortisol is present in the blood-
adrenal gland. Cortisol regulates the function of stream, it is processed by the kidneys and removed as
nearly every organ and tissue in the body. waste in the urine. This 24-hour free cortisol test requires
that an individual collect exactly 24-hours’ worth of
Ectopic—In an abnormal position.
urine in a single container. The urine is then analyzed in
Endocrine—Pertaining to a gland that secretes a laboratory to determine the quantity of cortisol present.
directly into the bloodstream. This technique can also be paired with the administration
Gland—A collection of cells whose function is to of dexamethasone,which in a normal individual would
release certain chemicals (hormones) that are cause urine cortisol to be very low. Once a diagnosis has
important to the functioning of other, sometimes been made using the 24-hour free cortisol test,other tests
distantly located, organs or body systems. are used to find the exact location of the abnormality
causing excess cortisol production.
Glucocorticoids—General class of adrenal corti-
cal hormones that are mainly active in protecting
against stress and in protein and carbohydrate Dexamethasone suppression test
metabolism.
This test is useful in distinguishing individuals with
Hormone—A chemical produced in one part of excess ACTH production due to a pituitary adenoma
the body that travels to another part of the body in from those with ectopic ACTH-producing tumors.
order to exert its effect. Patients are given dexamethasone (a synthetic glucocor-
ticoid) orally every six hours for four days. Low doses of
Hypothalamus—the part of the brain containing
dexamethasone are given during the first two days; for
secretions important to metabolic activities.
the last two days,higher doses are administered. Before
Pituitary—A gland located at the base of the
dexamethasone is administered,as well as on each day of
brain, the pituitary produces a number of hor-
the test,24-hour urine collections are obtained.
mones, including hormones that regulate growth
Because cortisol and other glucocorticoids signal the
and reproductive function.
pituitary to decrease ACTH, the normal response after
taking dexamethasone is a drop in blood and urine corti-
sol levels. Thus,the cortisol response to dexamethasone
differs depending on whether the cause of Cushing’s syn-
•irregular menstrual periods in women
drome is a pituitary adenoma or an ectopic ACTH-pro-
•decreased sex drive in men and difficulty maintaining
ducing tumor.
an erection
However,the dexamethasone suppression test may
•abormal hair growth in women (in a male pattern,such
produce false-positive results in patients with conditions
as in the beard and mustache area),as well as loss of
such as depression,alcohol abuse,high estrogen levels,
hair from the head (receding hair line)
acute illness,and stress. On the other hand,drugs such as
phenytoin and phenobarbital may produce false-negative
results. Thus,patients are usually advised to stop taking
Diagnosis
these drugs at least one week prior to the test.
Diagnosing Cushing’s syndrome can be complex.
Diagnosis must not only identify the cortisol excess,but
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)
also locate its source. Many of the symptoms listed
stimulation test
above can be attributed to numerous other diseases.
Although a number of these symptoms seen together The CRH stimulation test is given to help distin-
would certainly suggest Cushing’s syndrome,the symp- guish between patients with pituitary adenomas and
972 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
s’gnihsuC
those with either ectopic ACTH syndrome or cortisol- ing on the type of cancer and how far it has spread. Radi-
secreting adrenal tumors. In this test,patients are given ation therapy may also be used on the pituitary (with or
an injection of CRH, the corticotropin-releasing hor- without surgery) for patients who cannot undergo
mone that causes the pituitary to secrete ACTH. In surgery,or for patients whose surgery did not successful-
patients with pituitary adenomas,blood levels of ACTH ly decrease pituitary release of ACTH.
and cortisol usually rise. However, in patients with
There are a number of drugs that are effective in
ectopic ACTH syndrome, this rise is rarely seen. In
decreasing adrenal production of cortisol. These medica-
patients with cortisol-secreting adrenal tumors,this rise
tions include mitotane, ketoconazole, metyrapone,
almost never occurs.
trilostane,aminoglutethimide,and mifepristone. These
drugs are sometimes given prior to surgery in an effort to
Petrosal sinus sampling reverse the problems brought on by cortisol excess. How-
ever, the drugs may also need to be administered after
Although this test is not always necessary,it may be
surgery (sometimes along with radiation treatments) in
used to distinguish between a pituitary adenoma and an
patients who continue to have excess pituitary production
ectopic source of ACTH. Petrosal sinus sampling involves
of ACTH.
drawing blood directly from veins that drain the pituitary.
This test,which is usually performed with local anesthe- Because pituitary surgery can cause ACTH levels to
sia and mild sedation, requires inserting tiny, flexible drop too low,some patients require short-term treatment
tubes (catheters) through a vein in the upper thigh or with a cortisol-like medication after surgery. Patients
groin area. The catheters are then threaded up slowly until who need adrenal surgery may also require glucocorti-
they reach veins in an area of the skull known as the pet- coid replacement. If the entire adrenal gland has been
rosal sinuses. X rays are typically used to confirm the cor- removed,the patient must take oral glucocorticoids for
rect position of the catheters. Often CRH is also given the rest of his or her life.
during the test to increase the accuracy of results.
When blood tested from the petrosal sinuses reveals Prognosis
a higher ACTH level than blood drawn from a vein in the
Prognosis depends on the source of the problem.
forearm, the likely diagnosis is a pituitary adenoma.
When pituitary adenomas are identified as the source of
When the two samples show similar levels of ACTH,the
increased ACTH leading to cortisol excess,about 80% of
diagnosis indicates ectopic ACTH syndrome.
patients are cured by surgery. When cortisol excess is
due to some other form of cancer,the prognosis depends
Radiologic imaging tests
on the type of cancer and the extent of its spread.
Imaging tests such as computed tomography scans
(CT) and magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) are only Resources
used to look at the pituitary and adrenal glands after a
BOOKS
firm diagnosis has already been made. The presence of a
Brickner,Colleen. Inside Out:An Autobiography.Spokane,
pituitary or adrenal tumor does not necessarily guarantee
WA:A.H. Clark Co.,1992.
that it is the source of increased ACTH production. Many
DeGroot,Leslie J.,ed.,et al. “Cushing’s syndrome.”In
healthy people with no symptoms or disease whatsoever Endocrinology,Vol. 2.Philadelphia:W.B. Saunders Co.,
have noncancerous tumors in the pituitary and adrenal 1995,1741-69.
glands. Thus, CT and MRI is often used to image the Williams,Gordon H.,and Robert G. Dluhy. “Hyperfunction of
pituitary and adrenal glands in preparation for surgery. the Adrenal Cortex.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine,edited by Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:
McGraw-Hill,1998.
Treatment
PERIODICALS
The choice of a specific treatment depends on the Boscaro,Marco,Luisa Barzon,Francesco Fallo,and Nicoletta
type of problem causing the cortisol excess. Pituitary and Sonino. “Cushing’s Syndrome.”Lancet357 (2001):783-
adrenal adenomas are usually removed surgically. Malig- 91.
nant adrenal tumors always require surgical removal. Boscaro,Marco,Luisa Barzon,and Nicoletta Sonino. “The
Diagnosis of Cushing’s Syndrome:Atypical Presentations
Treatment of ectopic ACTH syndrome also involves
and Laboratory Shortcomings.”Archives of Internal Medi-
removing all of the cancerous cells that are producing
cine160 (2000):3045-53.
ACTH. This may be done through surgery,chemothera-
Findlay,C. A.,J. F. Macdonald,A. M. Wallace,N. Geddes,and
py(using combinations of cancer-killing drugs),or radi- M. D. C. Donaldson. “Childhood Cushing’s Syndrome
ation therapy(using x rays to kill cancercells),depend- Induced by Betamethasone Nose Drops,and Repeat Pre-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 973
Cushing’s
syndrome
scriptions.”British Medical Journal3,no.17 (12 Sept.,
1998):739-40.
Kirk,Lawrence F.,Robert B. Hash,Harold P. Katner,and Tom
Jones. “Cushing’s Disease:Clinical Manifestations and
Diagnostic Evaluation.”American Family Physician62,
no. 5 (1 Sept.,2001):1119-27.
Newell-Price J.,and A. Grossman. “Diagnosis and Management
of Cushing’s Syndrome.”Lancet353 (1999):2087-88.
Orth,David N. “Cushing’s Syndrome.”The New England Jour-
nal of Medicine332,no. 12 (23 Mar.,1995):791-803.
Utiger,Robert D. “Treatment,and Retreatment,of Cushing’s
Disease.”The New England Journal of Medicine336,
no.3 (16 Jan.,1997):215-17.
ORGANIZATION
Cushing’s Support and Research Foundation,Inc. 65 East India
Linear red rashes around a patient’s knee caused by bur-
Row,Suite 22B,Boston,MA 02110. (617) 723-3674.
rowing larvae of the dog hookworm Ancylostoma brazilien-
<http://www.world.std.com>. sis.(Photograph by Dr.P.Marazzi, Custom Medical Stock Photo.
National Adrenal Disease Foundation. 505 Northern Boule- Reproduced by permission.)
vard,Suite 200,Great Neck,NY 11021. (516) 487-4992.
<http://www.medhelp.org>.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke are able to penetrate human skin (even through solid
(NINDS). National Institutes of Health,Bethesda,MD material,such as a beach towel). The larvae are common-
20892-2560. <http://www.ninds.nih.gov>. ly found in shaded,moist,or sandy areas (such as beach-
Pituitary Network Association. 16350 Ventura Boulevard,#231, es, a child’s sandbox, or areas underneath a house),
Encino,CA 91436. (805)499-9973. <http://www.pituitary. where they are easily picked up by bare feet or buttocks.
org>.
In minor infestations,there may be no symptoms at
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt all. In more severe cases, a red elevation of the skin
(papule) appears within a few hours after the larvae have
penetrated the skin. This usually arises first in areas that
are in contact with the soil,such as the feet,hands,and
buttocks.
Cutaneous larva migrans
Between a few days and a few months after infec-
Definition
tion,the larvae begin to migrate beneath the skin,leaving
Cutaneous larvae migrans is a parasitic skin disease extremely itchy red lines that may be accompanied by
caused by a hookworm larvae that usually infests dogs, blisters. These red lines usually appear at the top of the
cats,and other animals. Humans can pick up the infec- sole of the foot or on the buttocks.
tion by walking barefoot on soil or beaches contaminated Tyically,the larvae travel through the bloodstream,to
with animal feces. the lungs,and then migrate into the mouth where they are
swallowed and attach to the small intestine lining. There
Description they mature into adult worms. In cases where the larvae
migrate through the lungs, they can produce anemia,
Cutaneous larvae migrans (also called “creeping
cough,and pneumonia,in addition to the itchy rash.
eruption”or “ground itch”) is found in southeastern and
Gulf states,and in tropical developing countries.
The hookworms that cause the condition are small, Diagnosis
round blood-sucking worms that infest about 700 million
The condition can be diagnosed by microscopic
people around the world. Cutaneous larvae migrans
inspection of feces which can reveal hookworm eggs. In
occurs most often among children, those who crawl
addition visual inspection of the skin would reveal tell-
beneath raised buildings,and sunbathers who lie down
tale itchy red lines and blisters.
on wet sand contaminated with hookworm larvae.
Causes and symptoms Treatment
After an animal passes feces that are infested with People without intestinal symptoms do not need
hookworm eggs,the eggs hatch into infective larvae that treatment, since the worms will eventually die or be
974 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snargim
avral
suoenatuC
Description
KEY TERMS
CTCL,also known as mycosis fungoides,is a cancer
of the white blood cells that primarily affects the skin and
Larvae—Immature forms of certain worms.
only secondarily affects other sites. This disease involves
the uncontrollable proliferation of T-lymphocytes known
as T-helper cells, so named because of their role in the
immune response. T-helper cells are characterized by the
excreted. Thiabendazole or albendazole are used to treat
presence of a protein receptor on its surface called CD4.
the infestation. Mild infections can be treated by apply-
Accordingly,T-helper cells are said to be CD4+.
ing one of the drugs to the skin along the tracks and the
normal skin surrounding the area. Thiabendazole also The proliferation of T-helper cells results in the pen-
can be given internally,but taken this way it can cause etration,or infiltration,of these abnormal cells into the
side effects including dizziness,nausea,and vomiting epidermal layer of the skin. The skin reacts with slightly
scaling lesions that itch, although the sites of greatest
Prognosis infiltration do not necessarily correspond to the sites of
the lesions. The lesions are most often located on the
No matter how severe an infestation,with adequate
trunk,but can be present on any part of the body. In the
treatment patients recover completely. However, if the
most common course of the disease,the patchy lesions
patient scratches the lesions open,the areas can become
progress to palpable plaques that are deeper red and have
vulnerable to bacterial infection.
more defined edges. As the disease worsens,skin tumors
develop that are often mushroom-shaped, hence the
Prevention
name mycosis fungoides. Finally,the cancer progresses
In the United States,the prevalence of dogs and cats to extracutanous involvement,often in the lymph nodes
with hookworms is the reason why the infective larvae or the viscera.
are found so commonly in soil and sand. The play habits
CTCL is a rare disease,with an annual incidence of
of children, together with their attraction to pets, puts
about 0.29 cases per 100,000 persons in the United
them at high risk for hookworm infection and cutaneous
States. It is about half as common in Eastern Europe.
larvae migrans.
However,this discrepancy may be attributed to a differ-
Human hookworm infestation can be prevented by ing physician awareness of the disease rather than a true
practicing good personal hygiene,deworming pets,and difference in occurrence. In the Unites States,there are
not allowing children to play in potentially contaminated about 500 to 600 new cases a year and about 100 to 200
environments. deaths. Usually seen in older adults,the median age at
diagnosis is 55 to 60 years,and it strikes twice as many
Resources men as women.
BOOKS
Turkington,Carol A.,and Jeffrey S. Dover. Skin Deep:An A-Z Causes and symptoms
of Skin Disorders,Treatments and Health.2nd ed. New
York:Facts on File,1998. The cause of CTCL is unknown. Exposure to chemi-
cals or pesticides has been suggested but the most recent
PERIODICALS
study on the subject failed to show a connection between
Rizzitelli,G.,G. Scarabelli,and S. Veraldi. “Albendazole:A
exposure and development of the disease. The ability to
New Therapeutic Regimen in Cutaneous Larva Migrans.”
International Journal of Dermatology36,no. 9 (Sept. isolate various viruses from cell lines grown from cells of
1997):700-703. CTCL patients raises the question of a viral cause,but
studies have been unable to confirm these suspicions.
Carol A. Turkington
The symptoms of CTCL are seen primarily in the
skin,with itchy red patches or plaques and,usually over
time, mushroom-shaped skin tumors. Any part of the
skin can be involved and the extent and distribution of
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
the rash or tumors vary greatly from patient to patient.
The only really universal symptom of the disease is the
Definition
itch and this symptom is usually what brings the patient
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a malignan- to the doctor for treatment. If the disease spreads outside
cy of the T-helper (CD4+) cells of the immune system. of the skin,the symptoms include swelling of the lymph
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 975
Cutaneous
T-cell
lymphoma
nodes, usually most severe in those draining the areas fers from IA in that greater than 10% of the body is cov-
with skin involvement. Spread to the viscera is most ered by plaques (T2,LN0-2,M0). Stage IIA occurs with
often manifested as disorders of the lungs,upper diges- any amount of plaques in addition to the ability to pal-
tive tract,central nervous system,or liver but virtually pate the lymph node and the lymph uninvolved,reactive,
any organ can be shown to be involved at autopsy. or dermatopathic (T1-2,LN0-2,M0).
Treatments applied to the skin are preferred for
Diagnosis patients having these preliminary stages of the disease,
commonly topical chemotherapywith mechlorethamine
Diagnosis of CTCL is often difficult in the early
hydrochloride (nitrogen mustard) or phototherapy of
stages because of its slow progression and ability to
psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA). Topical chemothera-
mimic many other benign skin conditions. The early
py involves application to the skin of nitrogen mustard,
patches of CTCL resemble eczema,psoriasis,and con-
an alkylating agent,in a concentration of 10–20 mg/dL
tact dermatitis. In a further complication,the early man-
in an aqueous or ointment base. Treatment of affected
ifestations of the disease can respond favorably to the
skin is suggested at a minimum and application over the
topical corticosteroid treatments prescribed for these skin
entire skin surface is often recommended. Care needs to
disorders. This has the unfortunate result of the disease
be taken that coverage of involved skin is adequate,as
being missed and the patient remaining untreated for
patients who self-apply the drug often cannot reach all
years. CTCL is most likely discovered when a physician
affected areas. The most common side effect is skin
maintains a suspicion about the disease,performs multi-
hypersensitivity to the drug. Nearly all patients respond
ple skin biopsies,and provides close follow-up after the
favorably to this treatment, with a 32–61% complete
initial presentation.
response rate, based on amount of skin involvement.
Skin biopsies showing penetration of abnormal cells Unfortunately,only 10–15% of patients maintain a com-
into the epidermal tissue are necessary to make a firm plete response rate after discontinuing the treatment.
diagnosis of CTCL. Several molecular studies can also
Phototherapy involves treatment with an orally
help support the diagnosis. The first looks at the cellular
administered drug,8-methyloxypsoralen,that renders the
proteins seen on the surface of the abnormal cells. Many
skin sensitive to long-wave ultraviolet light (UVA),fol-
cases of CTCL show the retention of the CD4+ protein,
lowed by controlled exposure to the radiation. During the
but the loss of other proteins usually seen on the surface
initial treatment period, which may last as long as six
of mature CD4+ cells, such as Leu-8 or Leu-9. The
months,patients are treated two to three times weekly.
abnormal cells also show unusual rearrangements at the
This is reduced to about once monthly after initial clear-
genetic level for the gene that encodes the T-cell recep-
ing of the lesions. Redness of the skin and blistering are
tors. These rearrangements can be identified using
the most common side effects of the treatment and are
Southern blot analysis. The information from the molec-
much more common in patients presenting with overall
ular tests,combined with the presence of abnormal cells
skin redness, or erythroderma, so lower intensities of
in the epidermis,strongly supports the CTCL diagnosis.
light are usually used in this case. About 50% of all
patients experience complete clearance with this treat-
Treatment ment. Some patients with very fair skin and limited skin
involvement can successfully treat themselves at home
Treatment of CTCL depends on the stage of the dis-
with special lamps and no psoralen.
ease. The current staging of this disease was first presented
at the International Consensus Conference on CTCL in The next stage,IIB,involves one or more cutaneous
1997. The staging attempts to show the complex interac- tumors, in combination with absent or present palpable
tion between the various outward symptoms of the disease lymph nodes,lymph uninvolved,reactive,or dermatopath-
and prognosis. The system has seven clinical stages based ic,and no visceral involvement (T3,LN0-2,M0). Stage III
on skin involvement (tumor = T),lymph node involvement is characterized by erythroderma, an abnormal redness
(LN),and presence of visceral metastases (M). over widespread areas of the skin (T4,LN0-2,M0).
The first stage,IA,is characterized by plaques cov- For more extensive disease,radiation therapyis an
ering less than 10% of the body (T1) and no visceral effective treatment option. It is generally used after the
involvement (M0). Lymph node condition at this stage topical treatments have proven ineffective. Individual
can be uninvolved,reactive to the skin disease,or der- plaques or tumors can be treated using electrons,ortho-
matopathic (biopsies showing CTCL involvement) but voltage x rays,or megavoltage photons with exposure in
not enlarged (LN0-2). The shorthand expression of this the range of 15 to 25 Gy. Photon therapy has proven par-
stage is therefore T1,LN0-2,M0. The next stage,IB,dif- ticularly useful once the lymph nodes are involved. Anoth-
976 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
amohpmyl
llec-T
suoenatuC
er possibility is total-skin electron beam therapy (TSEB),
although the availability of this treatment method is limit- KEY TERMS
ed. It involves irradiation of the entire body with energized
electrons. Side effects of this treatment include loss of fin- Alkylating agent—A chemical that alters the com-
ger and toe nails,acute redness of the skin,and inability to position of the genetic material of rapidly dividing
sweat for about six to 12 months after therapy. Almost all cells, such as cancer cells, causing selective cell
patients respond favorably to radiation treatment and any death; used as a topical chemotherapeutic agent
reoccurrence is usually much less severe. to treat CTCL.
Combinations of different types of treatments is a very Erythroderma—An abnormal reddening of the
common approach to the management of CTCL. Topical entire skin surface.
nitrogen mustard or PUVA is often used after completion
T-helper cells—A cellular component of the
of radiation treatment to prolong the effects. The addition
immune system that plays a major role in ridding
of genetically engineered interferon to PUVA therapy sig-
the body of bacteria and viruses, characterized by
nificantly increases the percentage of patients showing a
the presence of the CD4 protein on its surface; the
complete response. Furthermore,although treatments using
type of cell that divides uncontrollable with CTCL.
chemotherapy drugs alone, such as deoxycofomycin or
etretinate,have been disappointing for CTCL,combining Total-skin electron beam therapy—A method of
these drugs with interferon has shown promising results. radiation therapy used to treat CTCL that involves
Interferon has also been combined with retinoid treatments, bombarding the entire body surface with high-
although the mechanism of action of retinoids (Vitamin A energy electrons.
analogues) against CTCL is unknown.
The final two stages of the disease are IVA and IVB.
IVA presents as any amount of skin involvement,absent
have a mean life expectancy of about five years. At these
or present palpable lymph nodes, no visceral involve-
later stages, the disease is high risk, with most deaths
ment,and lymph that contains large clusters of convolut-
occurring by infection due to the depleted immune system
ed cells or obliterated nodes (T1-4,LN3-4). IVB differs
of the later-stage patient. Once a patient has reached stage
in the addition of palpable lymph nodes and visceral
IVB,the mean life expectancy is one year.
involvement (T1-4, LN3-4, M1). All of the treatment
methods described above are appropriate for the final
Prevention
two stages of the disease.
Studies have been unable to link CTCL to any envi-
ronmental or genetic factors,so prevention at this time is
Alternative treatment
not possible.
Itchingof the skin is one of the most troublesome
symptoms of CTCL. One alternative treatment for itchi- Resources
ness is the application of a brewed solution of chickweed
BOOKS
that is applied to the skin using cloth compresses. Anoth-
Hoppe,Richard T. “Mycosis Fungoides and Other Cutanous
er suggested topical application is a mixture of vitamin
Lymphomas.”In The Lymphomas,ed. George P. Canellos,
E,vitamin A,unflavored yogurt,honey,and zinc oxide. et al. Philadelphia:W.B. Saunders Co.,1999.
Evening primrose oil applied topically is also claimed to Wilson,Lynn D.,et al. “Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphomas.”In
reduce itch and promote healing. Cancer Principles & Practice of Oncology,ed. Vincent T.
DeVita,et al. Philadelphia:Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins,2001.
Prognosis
PERIODICALS
The prognosis for CTCL is dependent on the stage of Elmer,Kathleen B.,and Rita M. George,“Cutaneous T-Cell
the disease. Prognosis is very good if the disease has only Lymphoma Presenting as Benign Dermatoses.”American
progressed to Stage IA, with a mean survival of 20 or Family Physician59 (May 1999):2809–2815.
more years. At this point,the disease is a very low mortali-
ORGANIZATIONS
ty risk to the patient,with most deaths occurring to per-
National Cancer Institute. Building 31 Room 10A31 31 Center
sons in this group unrelated to CTCL. For patients diag- Drive MSC 2580 Bethesda,MD 20892-2580. (800)422-
nosed at stages IB and IIA,the median survival is about 12 6237. <http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov>.
years. The disease in both of these stages involves inter-
mediate risk to the patient. Patients in stage III and IVA Michelle Johnson,M.S.,J.D.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 977
Cutaneous
T-cell
lymphoma
ties,the delayed joining of the cranial (skull) bones,hip
Cutis laxa dislocation,curvature of the spine,flat feet,and exces-
sive tooth decay.
Definition
Acquired cutis laxa tends to follow (and may be
Cutis laxa (Latin for loose or lax skin) is a connec- caused by) severe illness characterized by fever,inflam-
tive tissue disorder in which the skin lacks elasticity and mation,and a severe skin rash (erythema multiforme);
hangs in loose folds. an injury to the nerves that control blood vessel dilation
and contraction; or an autoimmune condition.
Description
Cutis laxa is extremely rare; less than a few hundred Diagnosis
cases worldwide have been described. The signs of cutis laxa are very obvious, and it is
The several forms of cutis laxa are divided into pri- usually easy to diagnose by examining the skin. The
mary cutis laxa,which is present from birth and is hered- determination of which form of cutis laxa is present is
itary,secondary cutis laxa,which arises later in life and aided by information about the associated symptoms and
may be either hereditary,and acquired cutis laxa,which by family histories.
arises later in life and is not hereditary. Loose skin,the
primary and most obvious symptom of these diseases,is Treatment
caused by underlying defects in connective tissue struc-
There is no effective cure for any of these disorders.
ture,which also cause more serious internal problems in
Complications are treated by appropriate specialists,for
vocal cords,bones,cartilage,blood vessels,bladder,kid-
example,cardiologists,gastroenterologists,rheumatolo-
ney,digestive system,and lungs. The loose skin is partic-
gists,and dermatologists. Plastic surgery can be helpful for
ularly obvious on the face,and children with the disorder
cosmetic purposes,but the skin may become loose again.
look sad or mournful.
There are four genetic forms of the disease: sex-
Prognosis
linked,autosomal dominant,and two types of autosomal
recessive inheritance. The recessive forms are the most The prognosis for cutis laxa varies with the form of
common and are usually more severe than the other forms. the disorder. The effects may be relatively mild with indi-
viduals living a fairly normal,full life,or the disease may
be fatal.
Causes and Symptoms
Sex-linked cutis laxa is caused by a defective gene on
Prevention
the X chromosome. In addition to loose skin,its symp-
toms are mild mental retardation, loose joints, bone The inherited forms of cutis laxa are genetically
abnormalities (like hooked nose,pigeon breast,and fun- determined and are not currently preventable. Genetic
nel breast),frequent loose stools,urinary tract blockages, counselingcan be helpful for anyone with a family his-
and deficiencies in lysyl oxidase,an enzyme required for tory of cutis laxa. The cause of acquired cutis laxa is not
the formation of properly functioning connective tissue. known,so no preventive measures can be taken.
(But the defective gene does not code for lysyl oxidase.)
Autosomal dominant cutis laxa is caused by a defec- Resources
tive gene carried on an autosomal (not sex-linked) chro- BOOKS
mosome. Its symptoms are loose,hanging skin,missing Pope,F. Michael. “Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum,Cutis Laxa,
elastic fibers,premature aging,and pulmonary emphy- and Other Disorders of Elastic Tissue.”In Emery and
sema. Only a few families are known with cutis laxa Rimoin’s Principles and Practice of Medical Genetics.
inherited as a dominant trait. 3rd ed. Ed. David L. Rimoin,et al. New York:Churchill
Livingstone,1998.
Autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 1 is caused by a
defective gene on chromosome 5. Symptoms include ORGANIZATIONS
emphysema; diverticula in the esophagus, duodenum, British Coalition of Heritable Disorders of Connective Tissue.
and bladder; lax and dislocated joints; tortuous arteries; Rochester House,5 Aldershot Road,Fleet,Hampshire
hernias; lysyl oxidase deficiencies; and retarded growth. GU13 9NG,United Kingdom. (012) 52-810472.
National Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases Infor-
Autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 2 is also inherit-
mation Clearinghouse,National Institutes of Health. 1
ed as a recessive trait. In addition to the loose skin,this AMS Circle,Bethesda,Maryland 20892-3675. (877) 226-
form of the disease is characterized by bone abnormali- 4267. <http://www.nih.gov/niams/healthinfo/info.htm>.
978 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
axal
situC
KEY TERMS
Autosomal—Refers to the 22 pairs (in humans) of codes for a protein or RNA molecule or has a regu-
chromosomes not involved with sex determination. latory function.
Connective tissue—Tissue that supports and binds Lysyl oxidase—An enzyme required for the crosslink-
other tissue; much of it occurs outside of cells ing of elastin and collagen molecules to form proper-
(extra-cellular) and consists of fibrous webs of the ly functioning connective tissue; present in relatively
polymers, elastin and collagen. Cutis laxa is associ- low levels in at least some forms of cutis laxa.
ated with defects in these fibers.
Pigeon breast (also known as pectus carinatum)—
Diverticula—Pouches in the walls of organs. A chest shape with a central projection resembling
the keel of a boat.
Dominant trait—A genetic trait where one copy of
Recessive trait—An inherited trait that is outwardly
the gene is sufficient to yield an outward display of
obvious only when two copies of the gene for that
the trait; dominant genes mask the presence of
trait are present; an individual displaying a reces-
recessive genes; dominant traits can be inherited
sive trait must have inherited one copy of the defec-
from only one parent.
tive gene from each parent.
Duodenum—The uppermost part of the small intes-
Sex-linked—Refers to genes or traits carried on one
tine, about 10 in (25 cm) long.
of the sex chromosomes, usually the X.
Esophagus—The tube connecting the throat to the
Tortuous arteries—Arteries with many bends and
stomach, about 10 in (25 cm) long.
twists.
Funnel breast (also known as pectus excavatum)—
X chromosome—One of the two types of sex chro-
A condition where there is a hollow depression in
mosomes; females have two X chromosomes, while
the lower part of the chest.
males have one X chromosome and one Y chromo-
Gene—A portion of a DNA molecule that either some.
OTHER
OMIM Homepage,Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim>.
Lorraine Lica,PhD
Cuts see Wounds
CVA see Stroke
CVS see Chorionic villus sampling
Cyanosis
Definition
Cyanosis is a physical sign causing bluish discol-
oration of the skin and mucous membranes. Cyanosis is
Description
caused by a lack of oxygen in the blood. Cyanosis is
associated with cold temperatures, heart failure, lung Blood contains a red pigment (hemoglobin) in its red
diseases,and smothering. It is seen in infants at birth as a blood cells. Hemoglobin picks up oxygen from the lungs,
result of heart defects,respiratory distress syndrome, then circulates it through arteries and releases it to cells
or lung and breathing problems. through tiny capillaries. After giving up its oxygen,blood cir-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 979
Cyanosis
This elderly woman’s lips turned purple due to central
cyanosis,a condition most commonly due to slow blood cir-
culation,leading to a bluish skin coloration.(Photo
Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
Resources
KEY TERMS
BOOKS
Carolson,Karen J.,Stephanie A. Eisenstat,and Terra Ziporyn.
Hemoglobin—A colored substance (pigment) in The Harvard Guide to Women’s Health.Cambridge,MA:
the blood that carries oxygen to tissues and gives Harvard University Press,1996.
blood its red color. Franck,Irene,and David Brownstone. The Parent’s Desk Ref-
erence.New York:Prentice Hall,1991.
Respiratory distress syndrome—Also known as
hyaline membrane disease, this is a condition of
Carol A. Turkington
premature infants in which the lungs are imper-
fectly expanded due to a lack of a substance on
the lungs that reduces tension.
Cyclic vomiting syndrome
culates back to the lungs through capillaries and veins. Definition
Hemoglobin,as well as blood,is bright red when it contains
Cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) is a rare disorder
oxygen,but appears dark or “bluish”after it gives up oxygen.
characterized by recurring periods of vomiting in an oth-
The blue discoloration of cyanosis is seen most erwise normal child.
readily in the beds of the fingernails and toenails,and
on the lips and tongue. It often appears transiently as a
Description
result of slowed blood flow through the skin due to the
Children in the pre-school or early school years are
cold. As such,it is not a serious symptom. However,in
most susceptible to CVS, although it can appear any-
other cases,cyanosis is a serious symptom of underly-
where from infancy to adulthood. This disorder was
ing disease.
identified a century ago,but its cause is still unknown.
Episodes can be triggered by emotional stressor infec-
Causes and symptoms
tions,can last hours or days,and can return at any time.
The blue color of the skin and mucous membranes Abdominal painis a frequent feature.
is caused by a lack of oxygen in the blood. Low blood
oxygen may be caused by poor blood circulation, or Causes and symptoms
heart or breathing problems. It can also be caused by
The cause of CVS is still a mystery. Similarities to
being in a low-oxygen environment or by carbon
migraine suggest a common cause,but as yet no firm evi-
monoxide poisoning. More rarely,cyanosis can be pre-
dence has surfaced. Patients can usually identify some
sent at birth as a sign of congenital heart disease, in
factor that precedes an attack. Vomiting can be protracted
which some of the blood is not pumped to the lungs
and lead to complications such as dehydration,chemi-
where oxygen would make the blood a bright red color.
cal imbalances,tearing and burning,and bleeding of the
Instead, the blood goes to the rest of the body and
esophagus (swallowing tube). Between attacks,there is
remains unoxygenated. Cyanosis also may be caused by
no sign of any illness.
poisoningfrom chemicals,drugs,or contaminated food
and water.
Diagnosis
Other signs of low blood oxygen may accompany
cyanosis,including feeling lightheaded or fainting. The most important and difficult aspect of CVS is to
be sure there is not an acute and life-threatening event in
progress. So many diseases can cause vomiting—from
Treatment
bowel obstruction to epilepsy—that an accurate and time-
Treatment of the underlying disease can restore ly diagnosis is critical. Because there is no way to prove
proper color to the skin. the diagnosis of CVS,the physician must instead disprove
every other diagnosis. This can be tedious, expensive,
exhausting,and involve almost every system in the body.
Prognosis
The first episode may be diagnosed as a stomach flu when
If the underlying condition (such as heart or lung nothing more serious turns up. Only after several episodes
disease) can be properly treated,the skin will return to its and several fruitless searches for a cause will a physician
normal shade. normally consider the diagnosis of CVS.
980 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
gnitimov
cilcyC
Treatment Cyclobenzaprine see Muscle relaxants
Several different medications have given good Cyclophospha see Anticancer drugs
results in small trials. The antimigraine drugs
Cyclospora infection see Cyclosporiasis
amitriptyline and cyproheptadine performed well for one
study group. Propanolol is sometimes effective,and ery-
thromycin helped several patients in one study, not
because it is an antibiotic but because it irritates the
stomach and encourages it to move its contents forward
instead of in reverse. Cyclosporiasis
Definition
Alternative treatment
Cyclosporiasis refers to infection by the spore-form-
Constitutional homeopathic medicine can work well
ing protozoan known as Cyclospora. Protozoa are a
in treating CVS because it addresses rebalancing the
group of parasites that infect the human intestine. Para-
whole person,not just the symptoms.
sites are organisms that live in another body,called the
host,and get food and liquids from that host. This para-
Prognosis site is a member of the group of protozoa known as coc-
cidia,to which Cryptosporidiaalso belongs. This group
The disease may go on for many years without a
of parasites infects the human intestine, and causes
change in pattern. If the acute complications of prolonged
chronic recurrent infections in those with altered immu-
vomiting can be successfully prevented or managed,most
nity or AIDS. Even in people with normal immune func-
patients can lead normal lives between episodes. Medica-
tion,Cyclopsoracan cause prolonged bouts of diarrhea
tions may ease the symptoms during attacks.
and other gastrointestinal symptoms.
Resources Description
PERIODICALS Until recently, Cyclospora was considered to be a
Andersen,J. M.,et al. “Effective Prophylactic Therapy for form of algae. The parasite causes a common form of
Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome in Children Using Amitripty-
waterborne infectious diarrhea throughout the world. Just
line or Cyproheptadine.”Pediatrics100 (Dec. 1997):977-
how the parasite gets into water sources is not yet clear. It
981.
is known that ingestion of small cysts in contaminated
Fleisher,D. R. “Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome:A Paroxismal Dis-
water leads to disease.
order of Brain-Gut Interaction.”Journal of Pediatric Gas-
troenterology & Nutrition25 (1997):S13.
Fleisher,D. R. “Management of Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome.” Causes and symptoms
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition21
Symptoms begin after an incubation period of about a
(1995):S52-56.
day or so following ingestion of cysts. A brief period of flu-
Fleisher,D. R. “The Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome Described.”
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition21 like illness characterized by weakness and low-grade fever
(1995):S1-5. is followed by watery diarrhea,nausea,loss of appetite,and
Forbes,D.,and G. Withers. “Prophylactic Therapy in Cyclic muscle aches. In some patients,symptoms may wax and
Vomiting Syndrome.”Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterol- wane for weeks,and there are those in whom nausea and
ogy & Nutrition21 (1995):S57-59. burping may predominate. It is also believed that infection
Forbes,D. “Differential Diagnosis of Cyclic Vomiting Syn- can occur without any symptoms at all.
drome.”Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutri-
In patients with abnormal immunity (immunocom-
tion21 (1995):S11-14.
Li,B.U. “Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome. Introduction.”Journal of promised patients),such as those with AIDS and cancer,
Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition21 (1995):7-8. prolonged diarrhea and severe weight loss often become
Li,B. U. “Cyclic Vomiting:The Pattern and Syndrome Para- a major problem. The bile ducts are also susceptible to
digm.”Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition infection in AIDS patients.
21 (1995):S6-10.
Vanderhoof,J. A.,et al. “Treatment of Cyclic Vomiting in
Diagnosis
Childhood with Erythromycin.”Journal of Pediatric Gas-
troenterology & Nutrition21 (1995):S60-62. The disease should be suspected in anyone with a
history of prolonged or recurrent diarrhea. The parasite is
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD identified either by staining stool specimens or by apply-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 981
Cyclosporiasis
The use of the medication,trimethoprim-sulfameth-
KEY TERMS oxazole (Bactrim) for one week can be successful in
treating intestinal infections and prevents relapse in those
Anti-motility medications—Medications such as with a normal immune system. The same medicine can
loperamide (sold as Imodium), dephenoxylate be prescribed to treat infections of both the intestine or
(sold as Lomotil), or medications containing bile ducts in immunocompromised individuals,but main-
codeine or narcotics that decrease the ability of tenance or continuous treatment is often needed.
the intestine to contract. This can worsen the con-
dition of a patient with dysentery or colitis. Prognosis
Cyst—A protective sac that includes either fluid or The outlook is quite good for individuals in whom a
the cell of an organism. The cyst enables many diagnosis is made. Even without treatment, symptoms
organisms to survive in the environment for long usually do not last much more than a month or so except
periods of time without need for food or water. in cases with altered immunity. Fortunately,treatment is
usually successful even in those patients.
Immunocompromised—A change or alteration of
the immune system that normally serves to fight
Prevention
off infections other illnesses. This can involve
changes in antibodies that the body produces Aside from a waterborne source as the origin of
(hygogammaglobulinemia), or a defect in the cells infection,little else is known about how the parasite is
that partake in the immune response. Diseases transmitted. Therefore,little can be done regarding pre-
such as AIDS and cancer exhibit changes in the vention,except to maintain proper hand washing tech-
body’s natural immunity. niques and hygiene.
Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS)—A liquid
preparation developed by the World Health Orga- Resources
nization that can decrease fluid loss in persons
BOOKS
with diarrhea. Originally developed to be pre-
Davis,Charles E. “Laboratory Diagnosis of Parasitic Infec-
pared with materials available in the home, com- tion.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed.
mercial preparations have recently come into use. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Parasite—An organism that lives on or in another Liu,Leo X.,and Peter F. Weller. “Therapy for Parasitic Infec-
tions.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed.
and takes nourishment (food and fluids) from that
Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
organism.
Nash,Theodore E.,and Peter F. Weller. “Cyclosporiasis.”In
Protozoa—Group of extremely small single cell Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony
(unicellular) or acellular organisms that are found S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
in moist soil or water. They tend to exist as para- Owen,Robert L. “Cyclospora Cayetanensis.”In Sleisenger &
sites, living off other life forms. Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark
Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
Spore—A resistant form of certain species of bac-
Weller,Peter F. “Protozoal and Helminthic Infection:General
teria, protozoa, and other organisms.
Consideration.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Med-
icine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-
Hill,1997.
PERIODICALS
ing certain fluorescent ultraviolet techniques to find the
Lew,Edward A.,Michael A. Poles,and Douglas T. Dieterich.
characteristic cysts. Biopsy of an infected organ such as
“Diarrheal Disease Associated with HIV Infection.”Gas-
the intestine through an endoscope is another way to
troenterology Clinics of North America(June 1997):259-
make the diagnosis.
290.
ORGANIZATIONS
Treatment
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd.,
The first aim of treatment as with any severe diar- NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435,(404) 639-3311.
rheal illness is to avoid dehydrationand malnutrition. <http://www.cdc.gov>.
Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS) or intravenous fluids
OTHER
are sometimes needed. Medications used to treat diarrhea
“Cyclopsora.”Centers for Disease Control.<http://www.cdc.
by decreasing intestinal motility,such as loperamide or
gov/ncidod/diseases/cyclospo/cyclohp.htm>.
diphenoxylate are also useful,but should only be used
with the advice of a physician. David Kaminstein,MD
982 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisairopsolcyC
Cyclosporine see Immunosuppressant
drugs KEY TERMS
Ureters—Tubes that connect the kidneys to the
bladder. Urine produced by the kidneys passes
through the ureters to the bladder.
Cystectomy
Definition
Aftercare
Cystectomy is a surgical procedure to remove the
After the operation,the patient is given fluid-based
bladder.
nutritionuntil the intestines being to function normally
again. Antibioticsare given to prevent infection of the
Purpose incision sites. The nature of the organs removed mean
that there will be major lifestyle changes for the person
Cystectomy is performed to treat cancerof the blad-
undergoing the operation. Men will become impotent
der. Radiation and chemotherapyare also used to treat
because nerves controlling penile erection are cut during
bladder cancer. Surgery is used to remove cancer when
removal of the bladder. In women,infertilityis a conse-
it is in the muscle of the bladder.
quence because the ovaries and uterus are removed.
However, most women who undergo cystectomy are
Precautions postmenopausal and past their childbearing years.
Cystectomy is an aggressive treatment that may not Both men and women are fitted with an external bag
be appropriate for patients with superficial tumors that that connects to the stoma and collects the urine. The bag
respond to more conservative treatment. is generally worn around the waist under the clothing. It
takes a period of adjustment to get used to wearing the
bag. Because there is no bladder,urine is excreted as it is
Description
produced,essentially continuously. The stoma must be
Cystectomy is a major surgical operation. The treated properly to ensure that it does not become infect-
patient is placed under general anesthesia. An incision is ed or blocked. Patients must be trained to care for their
made across the lower abdomen. The ureters are located, stoma. Often there is a period of psychological adjust-
tied and cut. The ureters connect the kidneys to the blad- ment to the major change in life style created by the
der. Cutting them frees the bladder for removal. The stoma and bag. Patients should be prepared for this by
bladder and associated organs are removed. In men,the discussion with their physician.
prostate is removed with the bladder. In women, the
uterus,fallopian tubes,ovaries,and part of the vagina are
Risks
removed with the bladder. The bladder collects urine
As with any major surgery,there is a risk of infec-
from the kidneys for excretion at a later time. Since the
tion; in this case,infection of the intestine is especially
bladder is removed, a new method must be created to
dangerous as it can lead to peritonitis(inflammation of
remove the urine. A small piece of the small intestine is
the membrane lining the abdomen).
removed,cleaned,and tied at one end to form a tube. The
other end is used to form a stoma,an opening through the
abdominal wall to the outside. The ureters are then con- Normal results
nected to the tube. Urine produced by the kidneys now
The bladder is successfully removed and a stoma
flows down the ureters, into the tube, and through the
created. Intestinal function returns to normal and the
stoma. The patient wears a bag to collect the urine.
patient learns proper care of the stoma and bag. He or she
adjusts to lifestyle changes and returns to a normal rou-
Preparation tine of work and recreation,some sports excluded.
The medical team will discuss the procedure and tell
Abnormal results
the patient where the stoma will appear and what it will
look like. The patient receives instruction on caring for a The patient develops an infection at the incision site.
stoma and bag. Counseling may be initiated. A period of The patient does not make a successful psychological
fastingand an enema may be required. adjustment to the long term consequences of impotence
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 983
Cystectomy
and urinary diversion. In some women,the vagina is con- the nucleus of all the body’s cells,control cell function
stricted,which may require a secondary procedure. by serving as the blueprint for the production of proteins.
Proteins carry out a wide variety of functions within
Resources cells. The gene that,when defective,causes CF,is called
the CFTR gene, which stands for cystic fibrosis trans-
BOOKS
membrane conductance regulator. A simple defect in this
Berkow,Robert,ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information.
gene leads to all the consequences of CF. There are over
Whitehouse Station,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,
500 known defects in the CFTR gene that can cause CF.
1997.
Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment.10th ed. Ed. However,70% of all people with a defective CFTR gene
Lawrence W. Way. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1994. have the same defect,known as delta-F508.
Sabiston,D. C.,and H. K. Lyrly. Essentials of Surgery.
Much as sentences are composed of long strings of
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1994.
words,each made of letters; genes can be thought of as
John T. Lohr,PhD long strings of chemical words,each made of chemical
letters, called nucleotides. Just as a sentence can be
changed by rearranging its letters,genes can be mutated,
or changed, by changes in the sequence of their
nucleotide letters. The gene defects in CF are called
Cystic fibrosis point mutations,meaning that the gene is mutated only at
one small spot along its length. In other words,the delta-
Definition F508 mutation is a loss of one “letter”out of thousands
within the CFTR gene. As a result, the CFTR protein
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited disease that
made from its blueprint is made incorrectly,and cannot
affects the lungs, digestive system, sweat glands, and
perform its function properly.
male fertility. Its name derives from the fibrous scar tis-
sue that develops in the pancreas, one of the principal The CFTR protein helps to produce mucus. Mucus is
organs affected by the disease. a complex mixture of salts,water,sugars,and proteins that
cleanses,lubricates,and protects many passageways in the
Description body,including those in the lungs and pancreas. The role
of the CFTR protein is to allow chloride ions to exit the
Cystic fibrosis affects the body’s ability to move salt
mucus-producing cells. When the chloride ions leave these
and water in and out of cells. This defect causes the lungs
cells,water follows,thinning the mucus. In this way,the
and pancreas to secrete thick mucus,blocking passage-
CFTR protein helps to keep mucus from becoming thick
ways and preventing proper function.
and sluggish,thus allowing the mucus to be moved steadi-
CF affects approximately 30,000 children and young ly along the passageways to aid in cleansing.
adults in the United States,and about 3,000 babies are
In CF,the CFTR protein cannot allow chloride ions
born with CF every year. CF primarily affects people of
out of the mucus-producing cells. With less chloride
white northern-European descent; rates are much lower
leaving,less water leaves,and the mucus becomes thick
in non-white populations.
and sticky. It can no longer move freely through the pas-
Many of the symptoms of CF can be treated with
sageways, so they become clogged. In the pancreas,
drugs or nutritional supplements. Close attention to and
clogged passageways prevent secretion of digestive
prompt treatment of respiratory and digestive complica-
enzymes into the intestine,causing serious impairment
tions have dramatically increased the expected life span
of digestion—especially of fat—which may lead to mal-
of a person with CF. While several decades ago most
nutrition. Mucus in the lungs may plug the airways,pre-
children with CF died by age two,today about half of all
venting good air exchange and, ultimately, leading to
people with CF live past age 31. That median age is
emphysema. The mucus is also a rich source of nutrients
expected to grow as new treatments are developed,and it
for bacteria,leading to frequent infections.
is estimated that a person born in 1998 with CF has a
median expected life span of 40 years. INHERITANCE OF CYSTIC FIBROSIS. To understand
the inheritance pattern of CF,it is important to realize that
Causes and symptoms genes actually have two functions. First,as noted above,
they serve as the blueprint for the production of proteins.
Causes
Second,they are the material of inheritance:parents pass
Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease, meaning it is on characteristics to their children by combining the
caused by a defect in the person’s genes. Genes,found in genes in egg and sperm to make a new individual.
984 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisorbif
citsyC
Each person actually has two copies of each gene, family history of CF have a one in 2,500 chance of hav-
including the CFTR gene,in each of their body cells. Dur- ing a child with CF.
ing sperm and egg production,however,these two copies
It may seem puzzling that a mutated gene with such
separate,so that each sperm or egg contains only one copy
harmful consequences would remain so common; one
of each gene. When sperm and egg unite,the newly creat-
might guess that the high mortality of CF would quickly
ed cell once again has two copies of each gene.
lead to loss of the mutated gene from the population.
The two gene copies may be the same or they may Some researchers now believe the reason for the persis-
be slightly different. For the CFTR gene,for instance,a tence of the CF gene is that carriers,those with only one
person may have two normal copies,or one normal and copy of the gene, are protected from the full effects of
one mutated copy,or two mutated copies. A person with cholera,a microorganism that infects the intestine,caus-
two mutated copies will develop cystic fibrosis. A person ing intense diarrhea and eventual death by dehydra-
with one mutated copy is said to be a carrier. A carrier tion. It is believed that having one copy of the CF gene is
will not have symptoms of CF,but can pass on the mutat- enough to prevent the full effects of cholera infection,
ed CFTR gene to his/her children. while not enough to cause the symptoms of CF. This so-
called “heterozygote advantage” is seen in some other
When two carriers have children,they have a one in genetic disorders,including sickle-cell anemia.
four chance of having a child with CF each time they
conceive. They have a two in four chance of having a
Symptoms
child who is a carrier,and a one in four chance of having
a child with two normal CFTR genes. The most severe effects of cystic fibrosis are seen in
two body systems: the gastrointestinal (digestive) sys-
Approximately one in every 25 Americans of north-
tem,and the respiratory tract,from the nose to the lungs.
ern-European descent is a carrier of the mutated CF
CF also affects the sweat glands and male fertility.
gene,while only one in 17,000 African Americans and
Symptoms develop gradually, with gastrointestinal
one in 30,000 Asian Americans are carriers. Since carri-
symptoms often the first to appear.
ers are symptom-free, very few people will know
whether or not they are carriers unless there is a family GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM. Ten to fifteen percent
history of the disease. Two white Americans with no of babies who inherit CF have meconium ileusat birth.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 985
Cystic
fibrosis
DOROTHY ANDERSEN, MD (1901–1963)
Dorothy Andersen was born on May 15, 1901, in
Asheville, North Carolina. She was the only child of Hans
Peter Andersen and the former Mary Louise Mason.
Orphaned as a young adult, Andersen put herself through
Saint Johnsbury Academy and Mount Holyoke College
before enrolling in the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
from which she received her M.D. in 1926.
Andersen turned instead to medical research as a
pathologist at Babies Hospital of the Columbia-Presbyter-
ian Medical Center in New York City, where she stayed for
more than 20 years, eventually becoming chief of patholo-
gy in 1952. Andersen is probably best known for discovery
of cystic fibrosis in 1935. That discovery came about during
the postmortem examination of a child who had supposed-
ly died of celiac disease, a nutritional disorder. She
searched for similar cases in the autopsy files and in med-
ical literature, eventually realizing that she had found a dis-
ease that had never been described and to which she gave
the name cystic fibrosis.
(Library of Congress)
Meconium is the first dark stool that a baby passes after one, which presumably allows at least some of their
birth; ileus is an obstruction of the digestive tract. The CFTR proteins to function normally in the pancreas.
meconium of a newborn with meconium ileus is thick-
RESPIRATORY TRACT. The respiratory tract includes ened and sticky,due to the presence of thickened mucus
the nose, the throat, the trachea (or windpipe), the
from the intestinal glands. Meconium ileus causes
bronchi (which branch off from the trachea within each
abdominal swelling and vomiting, and often requires
lung),the smaller bronchioles,and the blind sacs called
surgery immediately after birth. Presence of meconium
alveoli,in which gas exchange takes place between air
ileus is considered highly indicative of CF. Borderline
and blood.
cases may be misdiagnosed, however, and attributed
instead to “milk allergy.” Swelling of the sinuses within the nose is common
in people with CF. This usually shows up on x-ray,and
Other abdominal symptoms are caused by the inabil-
may aid the diagnosis of CF. However, this swelling,
ity of the pancreas to supply digestive enzymes to the
called pansinusitis,rarely causes problems,and does not
intestine. During normal digestion,as food passes from
usually require treatment.
the stomach into the small intestine,it is mixed with pan-
creatic secretions which help to break down the nutrients Nasal polyps, or growths, affect about one in five
for absorption. While the intestines themselves also pro- people with CF. These growths are not cancerous,and do
vide some digestive enzymes,the pancreas is the major not require removal unless they become annoying. While
source of enzymes for the digestion of all types of foods, nasal polyps appear in older people without CF,especially
especially fats and proteins. those with allergies,they are rare in children without CF.
In CF, thick mucus blocks the pancreatic duct, The lungs are the site of the most life-threatening
which is eventually closed off completely by scar tissue effects of CF. The production of a thick,sticky mucus
formation,leading to a condition known as pancreatic increases the likelihood of infection,decreases the abil-
insufficiency. Without pancreatic enzymes, large ity to protect against infection, causes inflammation
amounts of undigested food pass into the large intes- and swelling,decreases the functional capacity of the
tine. Bacterial action on this rich food source can cause lungs, and may lead to emphysema. People with CF
gas and abdominal swelling. The large amount of fat will live with chronic populations of bacteria in their
remaining in the feces makes it bulky, oily, and foul- lungs,and lung infection is the major cause of death for
smelling. those with CF.
Because nutrients are only poorly digested and The bronchioles and bronchi normally produce a
absorbed,the person with CF is often ravenously hungry, thin, clear mucus that traps foreign particles including
underweight, and shorter than expected for his age. bacteria and viruses. Tiny hair-like projections on the
When CF is not treated for a longer period,a child may surface of these passageways slowly sweep the mucus
develop symptoms of malnutrition, including anemia, along,out of the lungs and up the trachea to the back of
bloating,and,paradoxically,appetite loss. the throat, where it may be swallowed or coughed up.
This “mucociliary escalator” is one of the principal
Diabetes becomes increasingly likely as a person
defenses against lung infection.
with CF ages. Scarring of the pancreas slowly destroys
those pancreatic cells which produce insulin,producing The thickened mucus of CF prevents easy movement
type I,or insulin-dependent diabetes. out of the lungs,and increases the irritation and inflam-
mation of lung tissue. This inflammation swells the pas-
Gall stones affect approximately 10% of adults with
sageways,partially closing them down,further hamper-
CF. Liver problems are less common,but can be caused by
ing the movement of mucus. A person with CF is likely
the buildup of fat within the liver. Complications of liver
to cough more frequently and more vigorously as the
enlargement may include internal hemorrhaging,abdomi-
lungs attempt to clean themselves out.
nal fluid (ascites),spleen enlargement,and liver failure.
At the same time, infection becomes more likely
Other gastrointestinal symptoms can include a pro-
since the mucus is a rich source of nutrients. Bronchitis,
lapsed rectum,in which part of the rectal lining protrudes
bronchiolitis, and pneumonia are frequent in CF. The
through the anus; intestinal obstruction; and rarely,
most common infecting organisms are the bacteria
intussusception,in which part of the intestinal tube slips
Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, and
over an adjoining part,cutting off blood supply.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. A small percentage of people
Somewhat less than 10% of people with CF do not with CF have infections caused by Burkholderia cepacia,
have gastrointestinal symptoms. Most of these people do a bacterium which is resistant to most current antibiotics
not have the delta-F508 mutation,but rather a different (Burkholderia cepacia was formerly known as
986 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisorbif
citsyC
Pseudomonas cepacia.) The fungus Aspergillus fumiga-
tusmay infect older children and adults. KEY TERMS
The body’s response to infection is to increase
mucus production; white blood cells fighting the infec- Carrier—A person with one copy of a defective
tion thicken the mucus even further as they break down gene, who does not have the disease it causes, but
and release their cell contents. These white blood cells can pass along the defective gene to offspring.
also provoke more inflammation,continuing the down- CFTR—Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduc-
ward spiral that marks untreated CF. tance regulator, the protein responsible for regulat-
As mucus accumulates, it can plug up the smaller ing chloride movement across cells in some tis-
passageways in the lungs, decreasing functional lung sues. When a person has two defective copies of
volume. Getting enough air can become difficult; tired- the CFTR gene, cystic fibrosis is the result.
ness,shortness of breath,and intolerance of exercise Emphysema—A pathological accumulation of air
become more common. Because air passes obstructions in organs or tissues; term especially applied to the
more easily during inhalation than during exhalation, condition when in the lungs.
over time,air becomes trapped in the smallest chambers
Mucociliary escalator—The coordinated action of
of the lungs,the alveoli. As millions of alveoli gradually
tiny projections on the surfaces of cells lining the
expand, the chest takes on the enlarged, barrel-shaped
respiratory tract, which moves mucus up and out
appearance typical of emphysema.
of the lungs.
For unknown reasons, recurrent respiratory infec-
Mucolytic—An agent that dissolves or destroys
tions lead to “digital clubbing,”in which the last joint of
mucin, the chief component of mucus.
the fingers and toes becomes slightly enlarged.
Pancreatic insufficiency—Reduction or absence of
SWEAT GLANDS. The CFTR protein helps to regulate pancreatic secretions into the digestive system due
the amount of salt in sweat. People with CF have sweat
to scarring and blockage of the pancreatic duct.
that is much saltier than normal,and measuring the salti-
ness of a person’s sweat is the most important diagnostic
test for CF. Parents may notice that their infants taste salty
when they kiss them. Excess salt loss is not usually a prob-
respiratory symptoms,or salty sweat. A child born with
lem except during prolonged exercise or heat. While most
meconium ileus will be tested before leaving the hospi-
older children and adults with CF compensate for this
tal. Families with a history of CF may wish to have all
extra salt loss by eating more salty foods, infants and
children tested,especially if there is a child who already
young children are in danger of suffering its effects (such
has the disease. Some hospitals now require routine
as heat prostration),especially during summer. Heat pros-
screening of newborns for CF.
tration is marked by lethargy, weakness, and loss of
appetite,and should be treated as an emergency condition.
Sweat test
FERTILITY. Ninety-eight percent of men with CF are
The sweat test is both the easiest and most accurate
sterile,due to complete obstruction or absence of the vas
test for CF. In this test,a small amount of the drug pilo-
deferens,the tube carrying sperm out of the testes. While
carpine is placed on the skin. A very small electrical cur-
boys and men with CF form normal sperm and have nor-
rent is then applied to the area, which drives the pilo-
mal levels of sex hormones,sperm are unable to leave the
carpine into the skin. The drug stimulates sweating in the
testes,and fertilization is not possible. Most women with
treated area. The sweat is absorbed onto a piece of filter
CF are fertile,though they often have more trouble get-
paper,and is then analyzed for its salt content. A person
ting pregnant than women without CF. In both boys and
with CF will have salt concentrations that are one-and-
girls, puberty is often delayed, most likely due to the
one-half to two times greater than normal. The test can
effects of poor nutrition or chronic lung infection.
be done on persons of any age,including newborns,and
Women with good lung health usually have no problems
its results can be determined within an hour. Virtually
with pregnancy,while those with ongoing lung infec-
every person who has CF will test positively on it,and
tion often do poorly.
virtually everyone who does not will test negatively.
Diagnosis Genetic testing
The decision to test a child for cystic fibrosis may be The discovery of the CFTR gene in 1989 allowed
triggered by concerns about recurring gastrointestinal or the development of an accurate genetic test for CF.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 987
Cystic
fibrosis
Genes from a small blood or tissue sample are analyzed than a person without CF. Low-fat diets are notrecom-
for specific mutations; presence of two copies of the mended except in special circumstances, since fat is a
mutated gene confirms the diagnosis of CF in all but a source of both essential fatty acids and abundant calories.
very few cases. However,since there are so many differ-
Some people with CF cannot absorb enough nutri-
ent possible mutations,and since testing for all of them
ents from the foods they eat,even with specialized diets
would be too expensive and time-consuming,a negative
and enzymes. For these people,tube feeding is an option.
gene test cannot rule out the possibility of CF.
Nutrients can be introduced directly into the stomach
Couples planning a family may decide to have them- through a tube inserted either through the nose (a naso-
selves tested if one or both have a family history of CF. gastric tube) or through the abdominal wall (a gastrosto-
Prenatal genetic testingis possible through amniocente- my tube). A jejunostomy tube, inserted into the small
sis. Many couples who already have one child with CF intestine, is also an option. Tube feeding can provide
decide to undergo prenatal screening in subsequent preg- nutrition at any time,including at night while the person
nancies,and use the results to determine whether to ter- is sleeping, allowing constant intake of high-quality
minate the pregnancy. Siblings in these families are also nutrients. The feeding tube may be removed during the
usually tested,both to determine if they will develop CF, day,allowing normal meals to be taken.
and to determine if they are carriers,to aid in their own
family planning. If the sibling has no symptoms,deter- Respiratory health
mining his carrier status is often delayed until his teen
The key to maintaining respiratory health in a person
years or later,when he is closer to needing the informa-
with CF is regular monitoring and early treatment. Lung
tion to make decisions.
function tests are done frequently to track changes in
functional lung volume and respiratory effort. Sputum
Newborn screening
samples are analyzed to determine the types of bacteria
Some states now require screening of newborns for present in the lungs. Chest x rays are usually taken at
CF,using a test known as the IRT test. This is a blood test least once a year. Lung scans, using a radioactive gas,
which measures the level of immunoreactive trypsino- can show closed off areas not seen on the x ray. Circula-
gen, which is generally higher in babies with CF than tion in the lungs may be monitored by injection of a
those without it. This test gives many false positive radioactive substance into the bloodstream.
results immediately after birth,and so requires a second People with CF live with chronic bacterial coloniza-
test several weeks later. A second positive result is usual- tion; that is, their lungs are constantly host to several
ly followed by a sweat test. species of bacteria. Good general health,especially good
nutrition, can keep the immune system healthy, which
decreases the frequency with which these colonies begin
Treatment
an infection,or attack on the lung tissue. Exercise is anoth-
There is no cure for CF. Treatment has advanced con- er important way to maintain health,and people with CF
siderably in the past several decades,increasing both the are encouraged to maintain a program of regular exercise.
life span and the quality of life for most people affected
In addition,clearing mucus from the lungs helps to
by CF. Early diagnosis is important to prevent malnutri-
prevent infection; and mucus control is an important
tion and infection from weakening the young child. With
aspect of CF management. Postural drainage is used to
proper management,many people with CF engage in the
allow gravity to aid the mucociliary escalator. For this
full range of school and sports activities.
technique,the person with CF lies on a tilted surface with
head downward,alternately on the stomach,back,or side,
Nutrition depending on the section of lung to be drained. An assis-
tant thumps the rib cage to help loosen the secretions. A
People with CF usually require high-calorie diets
device called a “flutter” offers another way to loosen
and vitamin supplements. Height,weight,and growth of
secretions: it consists of a stainless steel ball in a tube.
a person with CF are monitored regularly. Most people
When a person exhales through it,the ball vibrates,send-
with CF need to take pancreatic enzymes to supplement
ing vibrations back through the air in the lungs. Some spe-
or replace the inadequate secretions of the pancreas.
cial breathing techniques may also help clear the lungs.
Tablets containing pancreatic enzymes are taken with
every meal; depending on the size of the tablet and the Several drugs are available to prevent the airways
meal,as many as 20 tablets may be needed. Because of from becoming clogged with mucus. Bronchodilators
incomplete absorption even with pancreatic enzymes,a and theophyllines open up the airways; steroids reduce
person with CF needs to take in about 30% more food inflammation; and mucolytics loosen secretions. Acetyl-
988 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisorbif
citsyC
cysteine (Mucomyst) has been used as a mucolytic for Gene therapy is currently the most ambitious
many years but is not prescribe frequently now, while approach to curing CF. In this set of techniques, non-
DNase (Pulmozyme) is a newer product gaining in popu- defective copies of the CFTR gene are delivered to
larity. DNase breaks down the DNA from dead white affected cells,where they are taken up and used to create
blood cells and bacteria found in thick mucus. the CFTR protein. While elegant and simple in theory,
gene therapy has met with a large number of difficulties
People with CF may pick up bacteria from other CF
in trials so far,including immune resistance,very short
patients. This is especially true of Burkholderia cepacia,
duration of the introduced gene,and inadequately wide-
which is not usually found in people without CF. While
spread delivery.
the ideal recommendation from a health standpoint might
be to avoid contact with others who have CF,this is not
usually practical (since CF clinics are a major site of care), Alternative treatment
nor does it meet the psychological and social needs of
In homeopathic medicine,the symptoms of the disease
many people with CF. At a minimum,CF centers recom-
would be addressed to enhance the quality of life for the
mend avoiding prolonged close contact between people
person with cystic fibrosis. Treating the cause of CF,
with CF,and scrupulous hygiene,including frequent hand
because of the genetic basis for the disease,is not possible.
washing. Some CF clinics schedule appointments on dif-
Homeopathic medicine seeks to treat the whole person,
ferent days for those with and without B. cepaciacolonies.
however,and in CF,this approach might include:
Some doctors choose to prescribe antibiotics only dur- •mucolytics to help thin mucous
ing infection,while others prefer long-term antibiotic treat-
•supplementation of pancreatic enzymes to assist in
ment against S. aureus. The choice of antibiotic depends on
digestion
the particular organism or organisms found. Some antibi-
otics are given as aerosols directly into the lungs. Antibiotic •respiratory symptoms can be addressed to open lung
treatment may be prolonged and aggressive. passages
•hydrotherapy techniques to help ease the respiratory
Supplemental oxygen may be needed as lung dis-
symptoms and help the body eliminate
ease progresses. Respiratory failure may develop,
requiring temporary use of a ventilator to perform the •immune enhancements can help revent the develop-
work of breathing. ment of secondary infections
Lung transplantation has become increasingly •dietary enhancements and adjustments are used to treat
common for people with CF, although the number of digestive and nutritional problems
people who receive them is still much lower than those
who want them. Transplantation is not a cure,however,
Prognosis
and has been likened to trading one disease for another.
Long-term immunosuppression is required, increasing People with CF may lead relatively normal lives with
the likelihood of other types of infection. About 50% of the control of symptoms. The possible effect of pregnancy
adults and more than 80% of children who receive lung on the health of a woman with CF requires careful consid-
transplants live longer than two years. Liver transplants eration before beginning a family as do issues of longevi-
are also done for CF patients whose livers have been ty and their children’s status as carriers. Although most
damaged by fibrosis. men with CF are functionally sterile,new procedures for
removing sperm from the testes are being tried,and may
Long-term use of ibuprofen has been shown to help
offer more men the chance to become fathers.
some people with CF,presumably by reducing inflam-
Approximately half of people with CF live past the
mation in the lungs. Close medical supervision is neces-
age of 30. Because of better and earlier treatment,a per-
sary, however, since the effective dose is high and not
son born today with CF is expected,on average,to live to
everyone benefits. Ibuprofen at the required doses inter-
age 40.
feres with kidney function,and together with aminogly-
coside antibiotics,may cause kidney failure.
Prevention
A number of experimental treatments are currently
the subject of much research. Some evidence indicates Adults with a family history of cystic fibrosis may
that aminoglycoside antibiotics may help overcome the obtain a genetic test of their carrier status for purposes of
genetic defect in some CF mutations,allowing the pro- family planning. Prenatal testing is also available. There
tein to be made normally. While promising,these results is currently no known way to prevent development of CF
would apply to only about 5% of those with CF. in a person with two defective gene copies.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 989
Cystic
fibrosis
Resources cystine. Research has shown that this condition is caused
by mutations on chromosome number two (humans have
BOOKS
23 pairs of chromosomes).
Harris,Ann,and Maurice Super. Cystic Fibrosis:The Facts.
New York:Oxford University Press,1995. A person who has inherited cystinuria may have
Orenstein,David. Cystic Fibrosis:A Guide for Patient and other abnormal bodily functions. In addition to excess
Family.Philadelphia:Lippincott-Raven,1997. levels of the amino acid cystine, high amounts of the
ORGANIZATIONS amino acids lysine,arginine,and ornithine are found in
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. 6931 Arlington Road,Bethesda, the urine. This condition indicates that these amino acids
MD 20814. (800) 344-4823. <http://www.cff.org>. are not being reabsorbed by the body.
OTHER When excess cystine crystals clump together to form
CysticFibrosis.com.<http://www.cysticfibrosis.com>. a stone,the stone can block portions of the interior of the
kidney or the tube (the ureter) that connects the kidney to
Richard Robinson the urinary bladder. These cystine stones can be painful,
and depending upon where the stone becomes trapped,
the pain can be felt in the lower back or the abdomen.
Nausea and vomitingcan also occur,and patients may
sometimes feel the need to urinate often. Cystine stones
Cystinuria can also cause blood in the urine. When the urinary tract
is blocked by a stone,urinary tract infections or kidney
Definition failure may result.
Cystinuria is an inborn error of amino acid transport
that results in the defective absorption by the kidneys of
Diagnosis
the amino acid called cystine. The name means “cystine
in the urine.” Small stones (called “silent”) often do not cause any
symptoms, although they can be detected by an x ray.
Large stones are often painful and easily noticed by the
Description
patient. Blood in the urine can also mean that a stone has
Cystine is an amino acid. Amino acids are organic formed.
compounds needed by the body to make proteins and for
When the urine contains extremely high amounts of
many normal functions. When the kidneys don’t absorb
cystine, yellow-brown hexagonal crystals are visible
cystine,this compound builds up in the urine. When the
when a sample is examined under the microscope. Urine
amount of cystine in the urine exceeds its solubility (the
samples can also be mixed with chemicals that change
greatest amount that can be dissolved),crystals form. As
color when high levels of cystine are present. When the
the amount of cystine continues to increase in the urine,
compound nitroprusside is added to urine that has been
the number of crystals also increases. When very large
made alkaline by the addition of ammonia, the urine
numbers of cystine crystals form, they clump together
specimen turns red if it contains excess cystine.
into what is called a stone.
Treatment
Causes and symptoms
No treatment can decrease cystine excretion. The
Cystinuria is a rare disease that occurs when people
best treatment for cystinuria is to prevent stones from
inherit an abnormal gene from their parents. This disease
forming. Stones can be prevented by drinking enough
occurs in differing degrees of severity in people who
liquid each day (about 5–7 qts) to produce at least 8 pts
have inherited either one or two abnormal genes.
of urine,thus keeping the concentration of cystine in the
Humans have two copies of each gene. When both are
urine low. Because a person doesn’t drink throughout the
abnormal, the condition is called homozygous for the
night,less urine is produced,and the likelihood of stone
disease. When one copy is normal and the other is abnor-
formation increases. This risk can be minimized by
mal,the condition is called heterozygous for the disease.
drinking water or other liquids just before going to bed.
Persons with one abnormal gene can have a milder form
of cystinuria that rarely results in the formation of stones.
Drug treatments
Severe cystinuria occurs when people are homozy-
gous for the disease. For these individuals,the kidneys In addition to drinking large amounts of fluids,it is
may excrete as much as 30 times the normal amount of helpful to make the urine more alkaline. Cystine dis-
990 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
airunitsyC
solves more easily in alkaline urine. To increase urine
alkalinity, a person may take sodium bicarbonate and KEY TERMS
acetazolamide. Penicillamine,a drug that increases the
solubility of cystine,may be prescribed for patients who Alkaline—A solution is considered alkaline if it
do not respond well to other therapies. This drug must be contains fewer hydrogen atoms than pure water.
used with caution,however,because it can cause serious
Amino acid—An organic compound made of an
side effects or allergic reactions. For those unable to take
amino group (containing nitrogen and hydrogen)
penicillamine,another drug,alpha-mercaptopropionyl-
and a carbolic acid group. Amino acids are an
glycine (Thiola),may be prescribed.
essential part of protein molecules.
Surgical treatments Nephroscope—An instrument made of a light
source in a tube. The tube is inserted into the kid-
Most stones can be removed from the body by nor-
ney through an incision in the back and used to
mal urination, helped by drinking large amounts of
locate kidney stones. The stones are broken up
water. Large stones that cannot be passed this way must
with high frequency sound waves and removed by
be removed by surgical procedures.
suction through the scope.
Large stones can be surgically removed by having a
Nitroprusside—A compound that is used in labo-
device called a uretoscope placed into the urethra, up
ratory tests to identify large amounts of cystine in
through the bladder and into the ureter,where the trapped
urine samples.
stone can be seen and removed. Another method involves
Uretoscope—A tube-shaped device inserted into
using sound-wave energy aimed from outside the body to
the body through the urinary system that allows
break the large stone into small pieces that can be passed
objects to be both seen and grasped for removal.
by urination. This external technique is called extracor-
poreal shock-wave lithotripsy(ESWL).
For large stones in the kidney,a procedure called per-
cutaneous nephrolithomy may be used. In this procedure,
Presti Jr.,Joseph C.,Marshall L. Stoller,and Peter R. Carroll.
the surgeon makes a small incision in the back over the “Urology.”In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,
kidney. An instrument called a nephroscope is inserted 1998.37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:
through the incision into the kidney. The surgeon uses the Appleton & Lange,1997.
nephroscope to locate and remove the stone. If the stone
ORGANIZATIONS
is very large,it may be broken up into smaller pieces by
Cystinuria Support Network. 21001 NE 36th St.,Redmond,WA
an ultrasonic or other kind of probe before removal.
98053. (425) 868-2996. <http://www.cystinuria.com>.
National Kidney Foundation. 30 East 33rd St.,New York,NY
10016. (800) 622-9010. <http://www.kidney.org>.
Prognosis
As many as 50% of patients who have had surgical Dominic De Bellis,PhD
treatment for a kidney stone will have another stone
within five years if no medicines are used to treat this
condition.
Cystitis
Prevention Definition
Cystinuria is a genetic disorder that currently cannot Cystitis is defined as inflammation of the urinary blad-
be prevented. der. Urethritisis an inflammation of the urethra,which is
the passageway that connects the bladder with the exterior
Resources of the body. Sometimes cystitis and urethritis are referred
to collectively as a lower urinary tract infection,or UTI.
BOOKS
Infection of the upper urinary tract involves the spread of
Elsas,Louis S.,Nicola Longo,and Leon E. Rosenberg. “Inher-
bacteria to the kidney and is called pyelonephritis.
ited Defects of Membrane Transport.”In Harrison’s Prin-
ciples of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al.
New York:McGraw-Hill,1997. Description
“Kidney Stones in Adults.”In Kidney and Urinary Tract Dis-
eases and Disorders Sourcebook,ed. Linda M. Ross. The frequency of bladder infections in humans varies
Detroit:Omnigraphics,1997. significantly according to age and sex. The male/female
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 991
Cystitis
ratio of UTIs in children younger than 12 months is 4:1 •Inadequate personal hygiene. Bacteria from fecal matter
because of the high rate of birth defectsin the urinary or vaginal discharges can enter the female urethra
tract of male infants. In adult life,the male/female ratio of because its opening is very close to the vagina and anus.
UTIs is 1:50. After age 50,however,the incidence among
•History of previous UTIs. About 80% of women with
males increases due to prostate disorders.
cystitis develop recurrences within two years.
Cystitis in women The early symptoms of cystitis in women are
dysuria, or pain on urination; urgency, or a sudden
Cystitis is a common female problem. It is estimated
strong desire to urinate; and increased frequency of uri-
that 50% of adult women experience at least one episode
nation. About 50% of female patients experience fever,
of dysuria (painful urination); half of these patients have
pain in the lower back or flanks,nausea and vomiting,
a bacterial UTI. Between 2–5% of women’s visits to pri-
or shaking chills. These symptoms indicate pyelonephri-
mary care doctors are for UTI symptoms. About 90% of
tis,or spread of the infection to the upper urinary tract.
UTIs in women are uncomplicated but recurrent.
Males
Cystitis in men
UTIs are uncommon in younger and middle-aged Most UTIs in adult males are complications of kid-
men,but may occur as complications of bacterial infec- ney or prostate infections. They are usually associated
tions of the kidney or prostate gland. with a tumor or kidney stones that block the flow of
urine and are often persistent infections caused by drug-
Cystitis in children resistant organisms. UTIs in men are most likely to be
caused by E. colior another gram-negative bacterium. S.
In children, cystitis is often caused by congenital
saprophyticus,which is the second most common cause
abnormalities (present at birth) of the urinary tract. Vesi- of UTIs in women,rarely causes infections in men. Risk
coureteral refluxis a condition in which the child can- factors for UTIs in men include:
not completely empty the bladder. It allows urine to
•Lack of circumcision. The foreskin can harbor bacteria
remain in or flow backward (reflux) into the partially
that cause UTIs.
empty bladder.
•Urinary catheterization. The longer the period of
catheterization,the higher the risk of UTIs.
Causes and symptoms
The symptoms of cystitis and pyelonephritis in men
The causes of cystitis vary according to sex because of
are the same as in women.
the differences in anatomical structure of the urinary tract.
Hemorrhagic cystitis
Females
Hemorrhagic cystitis, which is marked by large
Most bladder infections in women are so-called
quantities of blood in the urine, is caused by an acute
ascending infections,which means that they are caused
bacterial infection of the bladder. In some cases,hemor-
by disease agents traveling upward through the urethra to
rhagic cystitis is a side effect of radiation therapy or
the bladder. The relative shortness of the female urethra
treatment with cyclophosphamide. Hemorrhagic cystitis
(1.2–2 in in length) makes it easy for bacteria to gain
in children is associated with adenovirus type 11.
entry to the bladder and multiply. The most common bac-
teria associated with UTIs in women include Escherichia
coli(about 80% of cases),Staphylococcus saprophyticus, Diagnosis
Klebsiella,Enterobacter,and Proteusspecies. Risk fac-
When cystitis is suspected, the doctor will first
tors for UTIs in women include:
examine the patient’s abdomen and lower back,to evalu-
•Sexual intercourse. The risk of infection increases if the ate unusual enlargements of the kidneys or swelling of
woman has multiple partners. the bladder. In small children,the doctor will check for
fever,abdominal masses,and a swollen bladder.
•Use of a diaphragm for contraception
The next step in diagnosis is collection of a urine
•An abnormally short urethra
sample. The procedure differs somewhat for women and
•Diabetes or chronic dehydration
men. Laboratory testing of urine samples can now be
•The absence of a specific enzyme (fucosyltransferase) performed with dipsticks that indicate immune system
in vaginal secretions. The lack of this enzyme makes it responses to infection, as well as with microscopic
easier for the vagina to harbor bacteria that cause UTIs. analysis of samples. Normal human urine is sterile. The
992 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sititsyC
presence of bacteria or pus in the urine usually indicates
infection. The presence of hematuria, or blood in the KEY TERMS
urine,may indicate acute UTIs,kidney disease,kidney
stones, inflammation of the prostate (in men), Bacteriuria—The presence of bacteria in the urine.
endometriosis (in women), or cancer of the urinary
Dysuria—Painful or difficult urination.
tract. In some cases,blood in the urine results from ath-
letic training,particularly in runners. Hematuria—The presence of blood in the urine.
Pyelonephritis—Bacterial inflammation of the
Females upper urinary tract.
Female patients require a pelvic examination as part Urethritis—Inflammation of the urethra, which is
of the procedure to obtain urine specimens. The patient the passage through which the urine moves from
lies on an obstetrical table with legs in the stirrups. The the bladder to the outside of the body.
doctor first takes a vaginal culture smear. The patient is
then asked to void while lying on the table. The first
5–10 ml are collected to test for urethral infection. A
midstream urine sample of 200 ml is then collected to Treatment
test for bladder infection.
Medications
In women, a vaginal bacterial count that is higher
than those of the two urine samples indicates vaginitis. A Uncomplicated cystitis is treated with antibiotics.
high bacterial count in the first urine sample indicates These include penicillin, ampicillin, and amoxicillin;
urethritis. A count of more than 104 bacteria CFU/ml sulfisoxazole or sulfamethoxazole; trimethoprim;
(colony forming units per milliliter) in the midstream nitrofurantoin; cephalosporins; or fluoroquinolones.
sample indicates a bladder or kidney infection. A colony (Flouroquinolones are generally not used in children
is a large number of microorganisms that grow from a under 18 years of age.) Treatment for women is short-
single cell within a substance called a culture. A bacterial term; most patients respond within three days. Men do
count can be given in CFU (colony forming units). not respond as well to short-term treatment and
require seven to 10 days of oral antibiotics for uncom-
Males plicated UTIs.
In male patients,the doctor will cleanse the opening Patients of either sex may be given phenazopyridine
to the urethra with an antiseptic before collecting the or flavoxate to relieve painful urination.
urine sample. The first 10 ml of specimen are collected Trimethoprim and nitrofurantoin are preferred for
separately. The patient then voids a midstream sample of treating recurrent UTIs in women.
200 ml. Following the second sample, the doctor will
Over 50% of older men with UTIs also suffer
massage the patient’s prostate and collect several drops
from infection of the prostate gland. Some antibiotics,
of prostatic fluid. The patient then voids a third urine
including amoxicillin and the cephalosporins, do not
specimen for prostatic culture.
affect the prostate gland. Fluoroquinolone antibiotics
A high bacterial count in the first urine specimen or
or trimethoprim are the drugs of choice for these
the prostatic specimens indicates urethritis or prostate
patients.
infections respectively. A bacterial count greater than
Patients with pyelonephritis can be treated with oral
100,000 bacteria CFU/ml in the midstream sample sug-
antibiotics or intramuscular doses of cephalosporins.
gests a bladder or kidney infection.
Medications are given for 10–14 days, and sometimes
longer. If the patient requires hospitalization because of
Other tests
high fever and dehydration caused by vomiting,antibi-
Women with recurrent UTIs can be given ultrasound otics can be given intravenously.
tests of the kidneys and bladder together with a voiding
cystourethrogram to test for structural abnormalities. (A
Surgery
cystourethrogram is an x-ray test in which an iodine dye
is used to better view the urinary bladder and urethra.) A minority of women with complicated UTIs may
Voiding cystourethrograms are also used to evaluate chil- require surgical treatment to prevent recurrent infections.
dren with UTIs. In some cases,computed tomography Surgery is also used to treat reflux problems (movement
scans (CT scans) can be used to evaluate patients for of the urine backwards) or other structural abnormalities
possible cancers in the urinary tract. in children and anatomical abnormalities in adult males.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 993
Cystitis
Alternative treatment Resources
Alternative treatment for cystitis may emphasize elim- BOOKS
inating all sugar from the diet and drinking lots of water. Anderson,E. Everett. “Dysuria,Pyuria,and Hematuria.”In
Drinking unsweetened cranberry juice not only adds fluid, Current Diagnosis.Vol. 9. Ed. Rex B. Conn,et al.
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
but is also thought to help prevent cystitis by making it
Donovan,James F.,and Richard D. Williams. “Urology.”In
more difficult for bacteria to cling to the bladder wall. A
Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment. 10th ed. Ed.
variety of herbal therapies are also recommended. General-
Lawrence W. Way. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1994.
ly,the recommended herbs are antimicrobials,such as gar-
“Genitourinary Disorders:Lower Urinary Tract and Male Gen-
lic (Allium sativum),goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis),
ital Tract Infections.”In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis
and bearberry (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi), and/or demul- and Therapy.16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway,NJ:
cents that soothe and coat the urinary tract,including corn Merck Research Laboratories,1992.
silk and marsh mallow (Althaea officinalis). King,Lowell R. “Bacterial Infections of the Urinary Tract in
Girls.”In Conn’s Current Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E.
Homeopathic medicine can also be effective in treat-
Rakel. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
ing cystitis. Choosing the correct remedy based on the
“Lower Urinary Tract Infection.”In Professional Guide to Dis-
individual’s symptoms is always key to the success of
eases,ed. Stanley Loeb et al. Springhouse,PA:Spring-
this type of treatment. Acupunctureand Chinese tradi- house Corporation,1991.
tional herbal medicine can also be helpful in treating Mata,John A. “Bacterial Infections of the Urinary Tract in
acute and chronic cases of cystitis. Females.”In Conn’s Current Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E.
Rakel. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Robertson,Jack R.,and David B. Hebert. “Gynecologic Urolo-
Prognosis
gy.”In Current Obstetric & Gynecologic Diagnosis &
Females Treatment,ed. Alan H. DeCherney and Martin L. Pernoll.
Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1994.
The prognosis for recovery from uncomplicated cys-
titis is excellent. Rebecca J. Frey
Males
The prognosis for recovery from uncomplicated
UTIs is excellent; however,complicated UTIs in males
are difficult to treat because they often involve bacteria Cystometry
that are resistant to commonly used antibiotics.
Definition
Cystometry is a test of bladder function in which
Prevention
pressure and volume of fluid in the bladder is measured
Females during filling,storage,and voiding.
Women with two or more UTIs within a six-month
period are sometimes given prophylactic treatment,usu- Purpose
ally nitrofurantoin or trimethoprim for three to six
The urinary bladder stores urine produced by the kid-
months. In some cases the patient is advised to take an
neys. The main muscle of the bladder wall,the detrusor,
antibiotic tablet following sexual intercourse.
relaxes to allow expansion of the bladder during filling.
Other preventive measures for women include: The urethra,the tube through which urine exits,is held
•drinking large amounts of fluid closed by a ring of muscle,known as the urethral sphinc-
ter. As volume increases,stretching of the detrusor and
•voiding frequently,particularly after intercourse
pressure on the sphincter sends signals to the brain,indi-
•proper cleansing of the area around the urethra cating the need for urination,or voiding. Voluntary relax-
ation of the sphincter and automatic contractions of the
Males detrusor allow successful and virtually complete voiding.
The primary preventive measure for males is prompt A cystometry study is performed to diagnose prob-
treatment of prostate infections. Chronic prostatitismay lems with urination, including incontinence, urinary
go unnoticed,but can trigger recurrent UTIs. In addition, retention,and recurrent urinary tract infections. Urinary
males who require temporary catheterization following difficulties may occur because of weak or hyperactive
surgery can be given antibiotics to lower the risk of UTIs. sphincter or detrusor, or incoordination of their two
994 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yrtemotsyC
activities. Infection of the bladder or urethra may cause
incontinence,as can obstruction of the urethra from scar KEY TERMS
tissue,prostate enlargement,or other benign or cancer-
ous growths. Loss of sensation due to nerve damage can Detrusor—Muscle of the bladder wall.
lead to chronic overfilling.
Sphincter—Ring of muscle between the bladder
and the urethra that functions to close off the ure-
Precautions thra.
The mild irritation of the urinary tract necessary for Urethra—Tube that empties urine from the blad-
insertion of the catheter may occasionally cause flushing, der to the exterior of the body.
sweating,and nausea.
Description
Normal results
The patient begins by emptying the bladder as much
as possible. A thin plastic catheter is then slowly inserted The normal bladder should not begin contractions
into the urethra until it reaches the bladder. Measure- during filling and should initially expand without resis-
ments are taken of the residual urine volume and bladder tance. A feeling of fullness occurs with a volume of
pressure. Pressure measurements may require a rectal 100–200 ml. The adult bladder capacity is 300–500 ml.
probe to account for the contribution of the abdominal The sphincter should relax and open when the patient
muscles to the pressure recording. wills it,accompanied by detrusor contractions. During
voiding,detrusor contraction should be smooth and lead
The bladder is then gradually filled with either warm
to a steady urine stream.
water,room temperature water,saline solution,carbon diox-
ide gas,or a contrast solution for x-ray analysis,depending
Abnormal results
on the type of study being done. The patient is asked to
describe sensations during filling, including temperature Inability of the bladder to relax during filling,or low
sensations and when the first feeling of bladder fullness bladder volume,may indicate interstitial cystitis,prostate
occurs. Once the bladder is completely full,the patient is enlargement,or bladder cancer. Contraction of the blad-
asked to begin voiding,and measurements are again made der during filling may be due to irritation from infection
of pressure and volume,as well as flow rate and pressure. or cysts,obstruction of the bladder outlet,or neurological
disease such as stroke,multiple sclerosis,or spinal cord
injury. Diminished sensation may occur with nerve
Preparation
lesions,peripheral neuropathy,or chronic overfilling.
There is no special preparation needed for this test.
The patient may be asked to stop taking certain medica-
Resources
tions in advance of the test,including sedatives,choliner-
BOOKS
gics,and anticholinergics.
Lamm D. L.,A. S. Paola,and F. A. Paola. Campbell’s Urology:
Review and Assessment.W. B. Saunders Co.,1995.
Aftercare
OTHER
Cystometry can be somewhat uncomfortable. The “Cystometrogram,Simple and Complex.”HealthGate Page.
patient may wish to reserve an hour or so afterward to <http://www.healthgate.com/HealthGate/free/dph/static/
recover. Urinary frequency or urgency,and some redden- dph.0085.shtml>.
ing of the urine,may last for a day. Increasing fluid intake
Richard Robinson
helps to flush out the bladder,but caffeinated,carbonated,
or alcoholic beverages are discouraged,because they may
irritate the bladder lining. Signs of infection, such as
fever, chills, low back pain, or persistent blood in the
urine,should be reported to the examining physician.
Cystoscopy
Risks Definition
There is a slight risk of infection due to tearing of Cystoscopy (cystourethroscopy) is a diagnostic pro-
the urethral lining. cedure that is used to look at the bladder (lower urinary
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 995
Cystoscopy
•a urinary tract which display signs of congenital abnor-
malities
•tumors located in the bladder
•the presence of bladder or kidney stones
•a stiffness or strained feeling of the urethra or ureters
•symptoms of an enlarged prostate
Blood and urine studies,in addition to x rays of the
kidneys,ureters,and bladder,may all occur before a cys-
toscopy. At the time of surgery,a retrograde pyelogram
may also be performed. Additional blood studies may be
needed immediately following surgery.
Precautions
While the cystoscopy procedure is commonly relied
upon to gather additional diagnostic information,it is an
invasive surgical technique that may involve risks for certain
patients. Those who are extremely overweight (obese),
smoke,are recovering from a recent illness,or are treating a
chronic condition may face additional risks from surgery.
Surgical risk also increases in patients who are cur-
rently using certain drugs including antihypertensives;
muscle relaxants; tranquilizers; sleep inducers; insulin;
sedatives; beta blockers; or cortisone. Those who use
mind-altering drugs also put themselves at increased risk of
complications during surgery. The following mind-altering
drugs should be avoided:narcotics; psychedelics; hallu-
cinogens; marijuana; sedatives; hypnotics; or cocaine.
Description
Depending on the type of information needed from a
tract), collect urine samples, and examine the prostate
cystoscopy,the procedure typically takes 10–40 minutes
gland. Performed with an optic instrument known as a
to complete. The patient will be asked to urinate before
cystoscope (urethroscope),this instrument uses a lighted
surgery which allows an accurate measurement of the
tip for guidance to aid in diagnosing urinary tract disease
remaining urine in the bladder. A well lubricated cysto-
and prostate disease. Performed by a urologist,this surgi-
scope is inserted through the urethra into the bladder
cal test also enables biopsies to be taken or small stones
where a urine sample is taken. Fluid is then pushed in to
to be removed by way of a hollow channel in the cysto-
inflate the bladder and allow the urologist to examine the
scope.
entire bladder wall.
During an examination,the urologist may take the fol-
Purpose
lowing steps:remove either bladder or kidney stones; gather
Categorized as an endoscopic procedure,cystoscopy tissue samples; and treat any suspicious lesions. In order to
is used by urologists to examine the entire bladder lining perform x-ray studies (retrograde pyelogram),a harmless
and take biopsies of any areas that look questionable. This dye is injected into the ureters by way of a catheter that is
test is not used on a routine basis,but may benefit the urol- passed through the previously placed cystoscope. After
ogist who is needing further information about a patient completion of all needed tests,the cystoscope is removed.
who displays the following symptoms or diagnosis:
•blood in the urine (also known as hematuria) Preparation
•incontinence or the inabililty to control urination
As a procedure that can be completed in a hospital,
•a urinary tract infection doctor’s office,or outpatient surgical facility,an injection
996 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypocsotsyC
Cystoscope
Urethra
Bladder
Prostate gland
Cystoscopy is a diagnostic procedure which is used to view
the bladder,collect urine samples,and examine the prostate
gland.This procedure also enables biopsies to be taken.
The primary instrument used in cystoscopy is the cysto-
scope,a tube which is inserted through the penis into the
urethra,and ultimately into the bladder.(Illustration by Elec-
tronic Illustrators Group.)
of spinal or general anesthesia may be used prior to a Patients should also contact their physician if they
cystoscopy. While this test is typically performed on an experience any of the following symptoms following
outpatient basis,a patient may require up to three days of surgery: pain, redness, swelling, drainage, or bleeding
recovery in the hospital. from the surgical site; signs of infection that may include
headache,muscle aches,dizzinessor an overall ill feel-
ing and fever; nausea or vomiting; strenuous or painful
Aftercare
urination; or symptoms that may result as side-effects
Patients who have undergone a cystoscopy will be from the medication.
instructed to follow these steps to ensure a quick recovery:
•due to soreness or discomfort that may occur in the ure-
Normal results
thra,especially while urinating,several warm baths a
day are recommended to relieve any pain A successful cystoscopy includes a thorough exami-
nation of the bladder and collection of urine samples for
•allow four days for recovery
cultures. If no abnormalities are seen,the results are indi-
•blood may appear in the urine—this is common,and soon
cated as normal.
clears up in one to two days following the procedure
•avoid strenuous exercisefor a minimum of two weeks
Abnormal results
following surgery
•sexual relations may continue when the urologist deter- Cystoscopy allows the urologist to detect inflamma-
mines that healing is complete tion of the bladder lining, prostatic enlargement, or
tumors. If these are seen, further evaluation or biopsies
•wait at least two days after surgery before driving
may be needed in addition to the removal of some tumors.
Patients may also be prescribed pain relievers and
antibioticsfollowing surgery. Minor pain may also be
treated with over-the-counter, non-prescription drugs Resources
such as acetaminophen. BOOKS
Buckman,Robert. “Bladder.”In What You Really Need To
Risks Know About Cancer:A Comprehensive Guide for Patients
and Their Families.Baltimore:The Johns Hopkins Uni-
As with any surgical procedure,there are some risks
versity Press,1997.
involved with a cystoscopy. Complications may include:
Griffith,H. Winter. “Cystoscopy.”In Complete Guide To Symp-
profuse bleeding; a damaged urethra; a perforated blad- toms,Illness & Surgery. New York:Berkley Publishing
der; a urinary tract infection; or an injured penis. Group,1995.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 997
Cystoscopy
Cystoscope
Urethra
Bladder
Prostate
A cystoscope helps the doctor examine the urethra,bladder,and prostate.(Illustration by Argosy Inc.)
Purpose
KEY TERMS
Consequences of a CMV infection can be devastating
in a pregnant woman, a transplant patient, or a person
Endoscopy—Examination of body organs or cavities
with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Antibody
through the use of an endoscope (a lighted optical
screening helps control the infection risk for these groups.
instrument used to see inside body cavities), such as
In a healthy,nonpregnant person,CMV infection is
a cystoscope used to complete a cystoscopy.
almost never serious. Symptoms, if present, are mild,
Retrograde pyelogram—A pyelography or x-ray
often resembling infectious mononucleosis due to
technique where radiopaque dye is injected into
Epstein-Barr virus. Antibody screening distinguishes
the kidneys from below, by way of the ureters,
between these two infections.
allowing further examination of the kidneys.
Ureter—The tube that carries urine from the kidney
Description
to the bladder, with each kidney having one ureter.
When first exposed to CMV,a person’s immune sys-
Urethra—A passageway from the bladder to the
tem is triggered and quickly makes antibodies to fight the
outside for the discharge of urine. In the female,
virus. Antibodies are special proteins designed to attack
this canal lies between the vagina and clitoris; in
and destroy foreign material,in this case,the cytomega-
the male, the urethra travels through the penis,
lovirus.
opening at the tip.
The test combines a person’s serum with a substance
to which CMV antibodies attach. This antibody-antigen
complex is measured and the amount of original anti-
body determined. If positive for antibodies,the serum is
The Patient’s Guide to Medical Tests.Ed. Barry L. Zaret,et al.
diluted,or titered,and the test repeated until the serum is
Boston:Houghton Mifflin,1997.
so dilute it no longer gives a positive result. The last dilu-
“Urology.”In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.
tion that gives a positive result is the titer reported.
35th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton
& Lange,1995. A test positive for CMV antibodies means the per-
son has been infected with the virus,either currently or
PERIODICALS
in the past; it doesn’t mean the person has lifetime immu-
“RX For Enlarged Prostate:Patient Involvement.”Executive
nity. After an infection,this virus,like all members of the
Health’s Good Health Report(Apr. 1994):1+.
herpes virus group,can stay hidden inside a person and
cause infection if the person’s immune system later
ORGANIZATIONS
American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Rd.,NE,Atlanta,GA weakens and antibody protection decreases. In fact,reac-
30329-4251. (800) 227-2345. <http://www.cancer.org>. tivation of such hidden (or latent) infection is not at all
uncommon and usually occurs without symptoms.
Beth A. Kapes
Transplant patients and people with weakened
immune systems,including those with HIV,are vulnera-
Cystourethroscopy see Cystoscopy ble to infection from several routes, including from
another person, from a donated organ or transfused
Cytomegalic inclusion disease see
blood, or from reactivation of a past infection. Before
Cytomegalovirus infection
transplant,both the recipient and donor are usually tested
for antibodies. A recipient who has never had CMV (neg-
ative for antibodies),should not receive an organ from a
donor who has had CMV (positive for antibodies). CVM
infection can be associated with organ rejection,or can
cause illness such as pneumonia, hepatitis, or death.
Cytomegalovirus antibody
Similarly,blood is usually screened for CMV antibodies
screening test before being transfused into a person with a weakened
immune system.
Definition
CMV infection is the most common congenital
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a common human virus. infection (existing at birth). The infection,passed from
Antibodies to CMV are evidence of a current or past mother to baby,can cause permanent mental or physical
infection. damage, or death. The antibody screening test tells a
998 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tset
gnineercs
ydobitna
surivolagemotyC
woman whether or not she has antibody protection
against the virus in case she is exposed during preg- KEY TERMS
nancy.
Tests that measure a specific type of antibody help Antibody—A special protein built by the body as a
tell the difference between a current and a past infection. defense against foreign material entering the body.
Immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies appear at the Cytomegalovirus (CMV)—A common human
beginning of an infection and last only weeks. virus causing mild or no symptoms in healthy peo-
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies appear 10–14 days ple, but permanent damage or death to an infect-
later and can last a lifetime. A person suspected of hav- ed fetus, a transplant patient, or a person with HIV.
ing a current infection should be tested at the beginning
Titer—A dilution of a substance with an exact
of the infection and again 10–14 days later.
known amount of fluid. For example, one part of
The CMV antibody screening test is also called the serum diluted with four parts of saline is a titer
transplant reaction screening test. Results are usually of 1:4.
available the following day.
Preparation
PERIODICALS
This test requires 5 mL of blood. Collection of the
Laliberte,Kimberly A. “CMV Screening:Interpreting the Test
sample takes only a few minutes. Result.”Advance for Medical Laboratory Professionals
(14 July 1997):12-13,17.
Aftercare Nancy J. Nordenson
Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture
site or the person may feel dizzy or faint. Pressure to the
puncture site until the bleeding stops reduces bruising.
Warm packs to the puncture site relieve discomfort.
Cytomegalovirus infection
Definition
Normal results
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a virus related to the
A person without previous exposure to CMV will
group of herpes viruses. Infection with CMV can cause
test negative.
no symptoms,or can be the source of serious illness in
people with weak immune systems. CMV infection is
Abnormal results also an important cause of birth defects.
The presence of antibodies means the person has
been infected with CMV, either now or in the past. An Description
antibody titer at least four times higher at the end of the CMV is an extremely common organism worldwide.
illness than at the beginning,or the presence of IgM anti- It is believed that about 85% of the adult population in the
bodies,indicates a recent or current first time infection. United States have been infected by CMV at some point
People with weak immune systems may not gener- in their lives. CMV is found in almost all of the body’s
ate antibodies against CMV. A current infection in a organs. It is also found in body fluids,including semen,
transplant patient or a person with HIV is confirmed with saliva,urine,feces,breast milk,blood,and secretions of
other tests,such as viral culture. the cervix (the narrow,lower section of the uterus).
CMV is also able to cross the placenta (the organ
Resources that provides oxygen and nutrients to the unborn baby in
the uterus). Because CMV can cross the placental barri-
BOOKS
er, initial infection in a pregnant woman can lead to
American Association of Blood Banks. Technical Manual.12th
infection of the developing baby.
ed. Bethesda:American Association of Blood Banks,
1996.
Isada,Carlos M.,et al. Infectious Diseases Handbook.Hudson: Causes and symptoms
Lexi-Comp Inc.,1995.
Mayo Medical Laboratories. Interpretive Handbook. CMV is passed between people through contact with
Rochester,MN:Mayo Medical Laboratories,1997. body fluids. CMV can also be passed on through sexual
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 999
Cytomegalovirus
infection
including pneumonia, hepatitis, and decreased blood
platelets.
However,an unborn baby is at great risk for seri-
ous problems when the mother becomes infected with
CMV for the first time while pregnant. About 10% of
these babies will be born with obvious problems,
including prematurity, lung problems, an enlarged
liver and spleen,jaundice,anemia,low birth weight,
small head size,and inflammation of the retina. About
90% of these babies may appear perfectly normal at
birth. Unfortunately, about 20% of these babies will
later develop severe hearing impairments and mental
retardation.
Diagnosis
Body fluids or tissues can be tested to reveal CMV
infection. However,this information is not always partic-
ularly helpful because CMV stays dormant in the cells
for life. Tests to look for special immune cells (antibod-
contact. Babies can be born infected with CMV,either
ies) directed specifically against CMV are useful in prov-
becoming infected in the uterus (congenital infection) or
ing that a person has been infected with CMV. However,
during birth (from infected cervical secretions).
these tests do not give any information regarding when
Like other herpes viruses, CMV remains inactive the CMV infection first occurred.
(dormant) within the body for life after the initial infec-
tion. Some of the more serious types of CMV infections
Treatment
occur in people who have been harboring the dormant
virus,only to have it reactivate when their immune sys- Ganciclovir and foscarnet are both antiviral med-
tem is stressed. Immune systems may be weakened ications that have been used to treat patients with
because of cancer chemotherapy, medications given weak immune systems who develop a serious illness
after organ transplantation,or diseases that significantly from CMV (including retinitis). As of 1998, research
lower immune resistance like acquired immunodeficien- is still being done to try to find useful drugs to treat
cysyndrome (AIDS). newborn babies suffering from congenital infection
with CMV. Antiviral drugs are not used to treat
In a healthy person, initial CMV infection often
CMV infection in otherwise healthy patients because
occurs without symptoms and is rarely noticed. Occa-
the drugs have significant side effects that outweigh
sionally, a first-time infection with CMV may cause a
their benefits.
mild illness called mononucleosis. Symptoms include
swollen glands,liver,and spleen; fever; increased white
Prognosis
blood cells; headache; fatigue; and sore throat. About
8% of all mononucleosis cases are due to CMV infec- Prognosis in healthy people with CMV infection
tion. A similar infection,though slightly more serious, is excellent. About 0.1% of all newborn babies will
may occur two to four weeks after receiving a blood have serious damage from CMV infection occurring
transfusioncontaining CMV. while they were developing in the uterus. About 50%
of all transplant patients will develop severe illnesses
In people with weakened immune systems, CMV
due to reactivation of dormant CMV infection. These
infection can cause more serious and potentially life-
illnesses have a high rate of serious complications
threatening illnesses. These illnesses include pneumo-
and death.
nia, and inflammations of the liver (hepatitis), brain
(encephalitis),esophagus (esophagitis),large intestine
(colitis),and retina of the eye (retinitis). Prevention
Babies who contract CMV from their mothers dur- Prevention of CMV infection in the normal,
ing birth rarely develop any illness from these infections. healthy person involves good handwashing. Blood
Infants born prematurely who become CMV infected products can be screened or treated to insure that they
during birth have a greater chance of complications, do not contain CMV.
1000 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitcefni
surivolagemotyC
An infected retina of an AIDS patient.Cytomegaloviruses
are herpes viruses that can,among other problems,act as
opportunistic infectious agents in suppressed immune sys-
tems,a common problem with AIDS sufferers.(Custom Med-
ical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Resources American Medical Association273,no. 18 (10 May
1995):1457+.
BOOKS
Shelton,Brenda K. “Understanding Cytomegalovirus Infec-
Corey,Lawrence. “Herpesviruses.”In Sherris Medical Micro-
tion.”Nursing25,no. 1 (Jan. 1995):32.
biology:An Introduction to Infectious Diseases.3rd ed.
Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk,CT:Appleton & Lange,
ORGANIZATIONS
1994.
Baylor College of Medicine. 1 Baylor Plaza,Houston,TX
Hirsch,Martin S. “Cytomegalovirus and Human Herpesvirus
77030. (713) 798-4951. <http://public.bcm.tmc.edu>.
Types 6,7,and 8.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd.,
Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:
NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435,(404) 639-3311.
McGraw-Hill,1997.
<http://www.cdc.gov>.
PERIODICALS March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275 Mamaroneck
Arribas,J. R.,et al. “Cytomegalovirus Encephalitis.”AIDS Ave.,White Plains,NY 10605. (914) 428-7100. <http://
Weekly Plus(4 Nov. 1996):30. www.modimes.org>.
Plis,Michael A.,and Henry Masur. “Promising New Treat-
ments for Cytomegalovirus Retinitis.”Journal of the Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1001
Cytomegalovirus
infection
D
D & C see Dilatation and curettage
Dacryocystitis
Definition
Dacryocystitis is an inflammation of the tear sac
(lacrimal sac) at the inner corner of the eye.
Description
Tears drain into little openings (puncta) in the inner
corners of the eyelids. From there, the tears travel
through little tube-like structures (canaliculi) to the
lacrimal sac. The nasolacrimal ducts then take the tears
from the lacrimal sac to the nose. That’s why people
need to blow their nose when they cry a lot.
Dacryocystitis is usually caused by a blockage of
Dacryocystitis of the right eye.The inner corner of the lower
the nasolacrimal duct,which allows fluid to drain into lid is bulging from an inflamed tear sac.Blockage of the tear
the nasal passages. When the lacrimal sac does not duct causes fluid to be trapped in the tear sac,which
drain,bacteria can grow in the trapped fluid. This con- becomes infected.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced
by permission.)
dition is most common in infants and people over 40
years old.
Diagnosis
Causes and symptoms
Dacryocystitis usually occurs in only one eye. As
In newborn infants,the nasolacrimal duct may fail to mentioned,the symptoms can range from watery eyes,
form an opening—a condition called dacryostenosis. The pain,swelling,and redness to a discharge of pus when
cause of dacryocystitis in adults is usually associated pressure is applied to the area between the bridge of the
with inflammation and infection in the nasal region. nose and the inner eyelids. A sample of the pus may be
Dacryocystitis can be acute,having a sudden onset,or it collected on a swab or in a tube for laboratory analysis.
can be chronic,with symptoms occurring over the course The type of antibiotic and treatment may depend on
of weeks or months. Symptoms of acute dacryocystitis which bacteria is present. In the acute form,a blood test
can include pain, redness, tearing, and swelling at the may reveal an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count;
inner corner of the eye by the nose. In chronic dacryocys- with a chronic infection,the WBC count is usually nor-
titis,the eye area may be swollen,watery or teary,and, mal. To identify the exact location of the blockage,an x
when pressure is applied to the area,there may be a dis- ray can be taken after a dye is injected into the duct in a
charge of pus or mucus through the punctum. procedure called dacryocystography.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1003
Prevention
KEY TERMS
There are no specific recommendations for the pre-
vention of dacryocystitis; however, good hygiene may
Canaliculi—Also known as lacrimal ducts, these
decrease the chances of infection.
tube-like structures carry the tears from the eyes to
the lacrimal sac.
Cannula— A narrow tube that can be inserted into Resources
a duct. BOOKS
Dacryocystography—An x ray of the tear duct “Lacrimal Apparatus.”In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and
Therapy.16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway,NJ:Merck
after injection of a dye that is used to help locate a
Research Laboratories,1992.
blockage in the duct.
Eckman,Margaret,and Nancy Priff,eds. “Disorders of the
Dacryocystorhinostomy—A surgical procedure to Eyelids and Lacrimal Ducts.”In Diseases.2nd ed. Spring-
drain the tear sac into the nasal passage. house,PA:Springhouse Corporation,1997.
Gorbach,Sherwood L.,John G. Bartlett,and Neil R. Blacklow,
Dacryostenosis—Obstruction or narrowing of the
eds. “Dacryocystitis.”In Infectious Diseases.2nd ed.
nasolacrimal duct. May be present at birth.
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1998.
Nasoacrimal duct—The tube that carries the tears “Dacryocystitis.”In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,
from the lacrimal sac to the nose. 1998.37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:
Appleton & Lange,1997.
Punctum—Tiny opening at the inner corners of
the upper and lower lids. The area for the begin-
Altha Roberts Edgren
ning of tear drainage.
Dandruff see Seborrheic dermatitis
Treatment
A warm compress applied to the area can help
relieve pain and promote drainage. Topical and oral
Death
antibioticsmay be prescribed if an infection is present.
Intravenous antibiotics may be needed if the infection is
Definition
severe. In some cases,a tiny tube (cannula) is inserted
into the tear duct which is then flushed with a sterile salt Death is defined as the cessation of all vital func-
water solution (sterile saline). If other treatments fail to tions of the body including the heartbeat,brain activity
clear up the symptoms,surgery (dacryocystorhinostomy) (including the brain stem),and breathing.
to drain the lacrimal sac into the nasal cavity can be per-
formed. In extreme cases, the lacrimal sac will be
removed completely. Description
In infants, gentle massage of the lacrimal sac four Death comes in many forms,whether it be expected
times daily for up to nine months can drain the sac and after a diagnosis of terminal illness or an unexpected
sometimes clear a blockage. As the infant grows,the duct accident or medical condition.
may open by itself. If the duct does not open,it may need
to be dilated with a minor surgical procedure.
Terminal illness
When a terminal illness is diagnosed,a person,fam-
ily,friends,and physicians are all able to prepare for the
Prognosis
impending death. A terminally ill individual goes
Treatment of dacryocystitis with antibiotics is usual- through several levels of emotional acceptance while in
ly successful in clearing the infection that is present. If the process of dying. First,there is denial and isolation.
there is a permanent blockage that prevents drainage, This is followed by anger and resentment. Thirdly,a per-
infection may recur and surgery may be required to open son tries to escape the inevitable. With the realization
the duct. If left untreated,the infected sac can rupture, that death is eminent, most people suffer from depres-
forming an open,draining sore. sion. Lastly,the reality of death is realized and accepted.
1004 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
htaeD
Causes and symptoms
ELISABETH KÜBLER-ROSS (1926– )
As of 2001,the two leading causes of death for both
men and women in the United States were heart disease
Contemporary physician who has become a world
and cancer. Accidental death was a distant third fol-
authority on the subject of death and after-death states.
lowed by such problems as stroke,chronic lung disor-
Born in Switzerland on July 8, 1926, she worked as a
ders,pneumonia,suicide,cirrhosis,diabetes mellitus,
country doctor before moving to the United States. Dur-
and murder. The order of these causes of death varies
ing World War II she spent weekends at the Kantonspital
among persons of different age,ethnicity,and gender. (Cantonai Hospital) in Zürich, where she volunteered to
assist escaped refugees. After the war she visited Maj-
danek concentration camp, where the horrors of the
Diagnosis
death chambers stimulated in her a desire to help peo-
In an age of organ transplantation, identifying the ple facing death and to understand the human impulses
moment of death may now involve another life. It there- of love and destruction. She extended her medical
by takes on supreme legal importance. It is largely due to background by becoming a practicing psychiatrist. Her
formal work with dying patients began in 1965 when
the need for transplant organs that death has been so pre-
she was a faculty member at the University of Chicago.
cisely defined.
She also conducted research on basic questions con-
The official signs of death include the following: cerning life after death at the Manhattan State Hospital,
New York. Her studies of death and dying have involved
•no pupil reaction to light
accounts by patients who reported out-of-the-body trav-
•no response of the eyes to caloric (warm or cold) stimu- el. Her research tends to show that while dying can be
lation painful, death itself is a peaceful condition. Her 1969
text, On Death and Dying, was hailed by her colleagues
•no jaw reflex (the jaw will react like the knee if hit with
and also became a popular best-seller.
a reflex hammer)
In 1978 Kübler-Ross helped to found Shanti Nilaya
•no gag reflex (touching the back of the throat induces
(Final Home of Peace), a healing and growth center in
vomiting)
Escondido, California. This was an extension of her
•no response to pain well-known “Life-Death and Transition” workshops
conducted in various parts of the United States and
•no breathing
Canada, involving physicians, nurses, social workers,
•a body temperature above 86°F (30°C), which elimi- laypeople, and terminally ill patients. Much of Kübler-
nates the possibility of resuscitation following cold- Ross’s later research was directed toward proving the
water drowning existence of life after death. Her publication To Live
Until We Say Good-bye (1979) was both praised as a
•no other cause for the above,such as a head injury
“celebration of life” and criticized as “prettifying” the
•no drugs present in the body that could cause apparent real situation. She has also dealt with issues such as
death AIDS and “near death” experiences. In the mid-1980s
Shanti Nilaya moved from San Diego County, Califor-
•all of the above for 12 hours
nia, to Head Waters, Virginia, where it continues to offer
•all of the above for six hours and a flat-line electroen- courses and short- and long-term therapeutic sessions.
cephalogram (brain wave study)
•no blood circulating to the brain,as demonstrated by
angiography
advances made in this direction. There has also been a
Current ability to resuscitate people who have liberalization of the use of narcotics and other drugs for
“died”has produced some remarkable stories. Drowning symptomatic relief and improvement in the quality of life
in cold water (under 50°F/10°C) so effectively slows for the dying.
metabolism that some persons have been revived after a
half hour under water.
Living will
One of the most difficult issues surrounding death
Treatment
in the era of technology is that there is now a choice,not
Only recently has there been concerted public effort of the event itself, but of its timing. When to die, and
to address the care of the dying in an effort to improve more often,when to let a loved one die,is coming with-
their comfort and lessen their alienation from those still in people’s power to determine. This is both a blessing
living. Hospice care represents one of the greatest and a dilemma. Insofar as the decision can be made
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1005
Death
Prevention
KEY TERMS
Autopsyafter death is a way to precisely determine
a cause of death. The word autopsy is derived from
Angiography—X rays of blood vessels filled with a
Greek meaning to see with one’s own eyes. A pathologist
contrast agent.
extensively examines a body and submits a detailed
Caloric testing—Flushing warm and cold water report to an attending physician. Although an autopsy
into the ear stimulates the labyrinth and causes can do nothing for an individual after death,it can benefit
vertigo and nystagmus if all the nerve pathways the family and,in some cases,medical science. Heredi-
are intact. tary disorders and disease may be found. This knowledge
could be used to prevent illness in other family members.
Electroencephalogram —Recording of electrical
Information culled from an autopsy can be used to fur-
activity in the brain.
ther medical research. The link between smoking and
Hospice—Systematized care of dying persons.
lung cancer was confirmed from data gathered through
Living will—A legal document detailing a person’s autopsy. Early information about AIDSwas also com-
wishes during the end of life, to be carried out by piled through autopsy reports.
designated decision makers.
Stroke—Interruption of blood flow to a part of the Resources
brain with consequent brain damage, also known
BOOKS
as a cerebrovascular accident (CVA).
Finkbeiner,J. Autopsy:A Manual & Atlas.Philadelphia:Saun-
ders,2001.
Iserson,Kenneth B. Death to Dust:What Happens to Dead
Bodies?Tucson:Galen Press Ltd,2001.
ahead of time,a living will is an attempt to address this
Kubler-Ross,Elisabeth. Death Is of Vital Importance.Tarry-
dilemma. By outlining the conditions under which one
town,NY:Station Hill Press,1995.
would rather be allowed to die,a person can contribute
Kubler-Ross,Elisabeth. On Death and Dying.New York:Col-
significantly to that final decision,even if not competent
lier Books,1993.
to do so at the time of actual death. The problem is that Lo,Bernard. “Ethical Issues in Clinical Medicine.”Harrison’s
there are uncertainties surrounding every severely ill Principles of Internal Medicine.14th ed. Ed. Anthony S.
person. Each instance presents a greater or lesser chance Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1998.
of survival. The chance is often greater than zero. The Mount,Balfour M. “Care of Dying Patients and Their Fami-
best living will follows an intimate discussion with deci- lies.”In Cecil Textbook of Medicine.21st ed. Ed. Lee
sion makers covering the many possible scenarios sur- Goldman,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders,2000.
Sheaff,Michael T.,and Deborah J. Hopster. Post Mortem Tech-
rounding the end of life. This discussion is difficult,for
nique Handbook.New York:Springer Verlag,2001.
few people like to contemplate their own demise. How-
ever,the benefits of a living will are substantial,both to
PERIODICALS
physicians and to loved ones who are faced with making
Barone,F. C.,et al. “Brain Cooling During Transient Focal
final decisions. Most states have passed living will laws, Ischemia Provides Complete Neuroprotection.”Neuro-
honoring instructions on artificial life supportthat were science and Biobehavioral Reviews21 (1997):31-44.
made while a person was still mentally competent. Dobell,A. R.,and J. S. Bailey. “Charles Drew and the Origins
of Deep Hypothermic Circulatory Arrest.”Annals of Tho-
racic Surgery63 (1997):1193-1199.
Euthanasia
Roger,V. L.,et al. “Time Trends in the Prevalence of Athero-
Another issue that has received much attention is sclerosis:A Population-based Autopsy Study.”American
assisted suicide (euthanasia). In 1997,the State of Ore- Journal of Medicine110,no. 4 (2001):267-273.
gon placed the issue on the ballot,amid much consterna- Targonski,P.,et al. “Referral to Autopsy:Effect of Atemortem
tion and dispute. Perhaps the main reason euthanasia has Cardiovascular Disease. A Population-based Study in
become front page news is because Dr. Jack Kevorkian,a Olmsted County,Minnesota.”Annals of Epidemiology11,
pathologist from Michigan,is one of its most vocal advo- no. 4 (2001):264-270.
cates. The issue highlights the many new problems gen-
ORGANIZATIONS
erated by increasing ability to intervene effectively in the
American Academy of Family Physicians. 11400 Tomahawk
final moments of life and unnaturally prolong the process
Creek Parkway,Leawood,KS 66211-2672. (913) 906-
of dying. The public appearance of euthanasia has also
6000. <http://www.aafp.org>.
stimulated discussion about more compassionate care of American Medical Association. 515 N. State Street,Chicago,
the dying. IL 60610. (312) 464-5000. <http://www.ama-assn.org>.
1006 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
htaeD
American Society of Clinical Pathologists. 2100 West Harrison may decide not to debride the wound because blood flow
Street,Chicago,IL 60612. (312) 738-1336. <http://www. may be insufficient for proper healing.
ascp.org/index.asp>.
College of American Pathologists. 325 Waukegan Road,North-
field,IL 60093. (800) 323-4040. <http://www.cap.org>. Description
Hospice Foundation of America. 2001 S St. NW Suite 300,
In debridement,dead tissue is removed so that the
Washington,DC 20009. (800) 854-3402. <http://www.
remaining living tissue can adequately heal. Dead tissue
hospicefoundation.org>.
exposed to the air will form a hard black crust,called an
OTHER eschar. Deeper tissue will remain moist and may appear
American Association of Retired Persons.<http://www.aarp.org>. white, or yellow and soft, or flimsy. The four major
Association for Death Education and Counseling. debridement techniques are surgical,mechanical,chemi-
<http://www. adec.org>. cal,and autolytic.
Death and Dying Grief Support.<http://www.death-dying.com>.
National Center for Health Statistics.<http://www.cdc.gov/
Surgical debridement
nchs>.
Surgical debridement (also known as sharp debride-
L. Fleming Fallon,Jr.,MD,DrPH ment) uses a scalpel,scissors,or other instrument to cut
dead tissue from a wound. It is the quickest and most
efficient method of debridement. It is the preferred
method if there is rapidly developing inflammation of the
body’s connective tissues (cellulitis) or a more general-
Debridement ized infection (sepsis) that has entered the bloodstream.
The procedure can be performed at a patient’s bedside. If
Definition the target tissue is deep or close to another organ,howev-
er,or if the patient is experiencing extreme pain,the pro-
Debridement is the process of removing non-living
cedure may be done in an operating room. Surgical
tissue from pressure ulcers,burns,and other wounds.
debridement is generally performed by a physician,but
in some areas of the country an advance practice nurse or
Purpose physician assistant may perform the procedure.
Debridement speeds the healing of pressure ulcers, The physician will begin by flushing the area with a
burns,and other wounds. Wounds that contain non-living saline (salt water) solution,and then will apply a topical
(necrotic) tissue take longer to heal. The necrotic tissue anesthetic gel to the edges of the wound to minimize
may become colonized with bacteria, producing an pain. Using a forceps to grip the dead tissue,the physi-
unpleasant odor. Though the wound is not necessarily cian will cut it away bit by bit with a scalpel or scissors.
infected,the bacteria can cause inflammation and strain Sometimes it is necessary to leave some dead tissue
the body’s ability to fight infection. Necrotic tissue may behind rather than disturb living tissue. The physician
also hide pockets of pus called abscesses. Abscesses can may repeat the process again at another session.
develop into a general infection that may lead to ampu-
tationor death. Mechanical debridement
In mechanical debridement, a saline-moistened
Precautions dressing is allowed to dry overnight and adhere to the
dead tissue. When the dressing is removed,the dead tis-
Not all wounds need debridement. Sometimes it is
sue is pulled away too. This process is one of the oldest
better to leave a hardened crust of dead tissue,called an
methods of debridement. It can be very painful because
eschar,than to remove it and create an open wound,partic-
the dressing can adhere to living as well as nonliving tis-
ularly if the crust is stable and the wound is not inflamed.
sue. Because mechanical debridement cannot select
Before performing debridement,the physician will take a
between good and bad tissue, it is an unacceptable
medical history with attention to factors that might com-
debridement method for clean wounds where a new layer
plicate healing, such as medications being taken and
of healing cells is already developing.
smoking. The physician will also note the cause of the
wound and the ways it has been treated. Some ulcers and
Chemical debridement
other wounds occur in places where blood flow is
impaired,for example,the foot ulcers that can accompany Chemical debridement makes use of certain enzymes
diabetes mellitus. In such cases,the physician or nurse and other compounds to dissolve necrotic tissue. It is more
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1007
Debridement
Afterward,moist dressings are applied to promote wound
KEY TERMS healing. Moist dressings are also used after mechanical,
chemical,and autolytic debridement. Many factors con-
Eschar—A hardened black crust of dead tissue tribute to wound healing,which frequently can take con-
that may form over a wound. siderable time. Debridement may need to be repeated.
Pressure ulcer—Also known as a decubitus ulcer,
pressure ulcers are open wounds that form when- Risks
ever prolonged pressure is applied to skin covering
It is possible that underlying tendons,blood vessels
bony outcrops of the body. Patients who are
or other structures will be damaged during the examina-
bedridden are at risk of developing pressure ulcers.
tion of the wound and during surgical debridement. Sur-
Pressure ulcers are commonly known as bedsores.
face bacteria may also be introduced deeper into the
Sepsis—A severe systemic infection in which bac- body,causing infection.
teria have entered the blood stream.
Normal results
Removal of dead tissue from pressure ulcers and other
selective than mechanical debridement. In fact,the body wounds speeds healing. Although these procedures cause
makes its own enzyme,collagenase,to break down colla- some pain,they are generally well tolerated by patients and
gen,one of the major building blocks of skin. A pharma- can be managed more aggressively. It is not uncommon to
ceutical version of collagenase is available and is highly debride a wound again in a subsequent session.
effective as a debridement agent. As with other debride-
ment techniques,the area first is flushed with saline. Any
Resources
crust of dead tissue is etched in a cross-hatched pattern to
allow the enzyme to penetrate. A topical antibiotic is also BOOKS
Maklebust,JoAnn,and Mary Y. Sieggreen. Pressure Ulcers:
applied to prevent introducing infection into the blood-
Guidelines for Prevention and Nursing Management,2nd
stream. A moist dressing is then placed over the wound.
ed. Springhouse,PA:Springhouse Corporation,1996.
Autolytic debridement PERIODICALS
Autolytic debridement takes advantage of the body’s Bale,S. “A Guide to Wound Debridement.”Journal of Wound
Care6 (Apr. 1997):179-182.
own ability to dissolve dead tissue. The key to the tech-
Sieggreen,Mary Y.,and JoAnn Maklebust. “Debridement:
nique is keeping the wound moist,which can be accom-
Choices and Challenges.”Advances in Wound Care,10
plished with a variety of dressings. These dressings help
(Mar./Apr. 1997):32-37.
to trap wound fluid that contains growth factors,enzymes,
and immune cells that promote wound healing. Autolytic ORGANIZATIONS
debridement is more selective than any other debridement American Academy of Wound Management. 1255 23rd St.,
method,but it also takes the longest to work. It is inappro- NW,Washington,DC 20037. (202) 521-0368. <http://
priate for wounds that have become infected. www.aawm.org>.
Wound Care Institute. 1100 N.E. 163rd Street,Suite #101,
North Miami Beach,FL 33162. (305) 919-9192. <http://
Preparation
woundcare.org>.
The physician or nurse will begin by assessing the
need for debridement. The wound will be examined,fre- Richard H. Camer
quently by inserting a gloved finger into the wound to
estimate the depth of dead tissue and evaluate whether it
lies close to other organs,bone,or important body fea-
tures. The area may be flushed with a saline solution
before debridement begins,and a topical anesthetic gel Decompression sickness
or injection may be applied if surgical or mechanical
debridement is being performed. Definition
Decompression sickness (DCS) is a dangerous and
Aftercare
occasionally lethal condition caused by nitrogen bubbles
After surgical debridement, the wound will be that form in the blood and other tissues of scuba divers
packed with a dry dressing for a day to control bleeding. who surface too quickly.
1008 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ssenkcis
noisserpmoceD
Description ies, veins, and lymphatic vessels, and trigger harmful
chemical reactions in the blood. The precise reasons for
According to the Divers Alert Network (DAN), a
bubble formation remain unclear.
worldwide organization devoted to safe-diving research
and promotion,less than 1% of divers fall victim to DCS How much extra nitrogen enters the tissues varies
or the rarer bubble problem called gas embolism, air with the dive’s depth and duration. Dive tables prepared
embolism,or arterial gas embolism (AGE). A study of the by the U.S. Navy and other organizations specify how
United States military community in Okinawa,where tens long most divers can safely remain at a particular depth.
of thousands of sport and military dives are made each If the dive table limits are exceeded,the diver must pause
year, identified 84 DCS and 10 AGE cases in 1989–95, on the way up to allow the nitrogen to diffuse into the
including nine deaths. This translated into estimates of one bloodstream without forming bubbles; these pauses are
case in every 7,400 dives and one deathin every 76,900 called decompression stops,and are carefully calibrated.
dives. DCS symptoms can be quite mild, however, and DCS can occur,however,even when a diver obeys safe
many cases certainly go unnoticed by divers. diving rules. In such cases, the predisposing factors
include fatigue, obesity, dehydration, hypothermia,
At times the terminology adopted by writers on
and recent alcohol use. As well,people who fly or travel
DCS can be confusing. Some substitute the term
to high-altitude locations without letting 12–24 hours
decompression illness (DCI) for DCS. Others treat DCI
pass after their last dive are at risk for DCS as well
as a label encompassing both DCS and AGE. An older
because their bodies undergo further decompression.
term for DCS is caisson disease, coined in the nine-
This is true even when flying in commercial aircraft.
teenth century when it was discovered that bridge con-
Many travelers are unaware that to save money on fuel
struction crews working at the bottom of lakes and
the cabin pressure in commercial aircraft is set much
rivers in large pressurized enclosures (caissons) were
lower than the pressure at sea level. At 30,000 ft (9,144
experiencing joint pain (a typical DCS symptom) on
m),for instance,cabin pressure is usually equivalent to
returning to the surface.
the pressure at 7,000–8,000 ft (2,133–2,438 m) above sea
level,a safe setting for everyone but recent divers. Exact-
Causes and symptoms ly how long a diver should wait before flying or traveling
to a high-altitude location depends on how much diving
The air we breathe is mostly a mixture of two gases,
he or she has done and other considerations. If there is
nitrogen (78%) and oxygen (21%). Unlike oxygen,nitro-
uncertainty about the appropriate waiting period,the sen-
gen is a biologically inert gas, meaning that it is not
sible course of action is to let the full 24 hours pass.
metabolized (converted into other substances) by the
Because the nitrogen bubbles that cause DCS can
body. For this reason,most of the nitrogen we inhale is
affect any of the body’s tissues, including the blood,
expelled when we exhale,but some is dissolved into the
bones,nerves,and muscles,many kinds of symptoms are
blood and other tissues. During a dive, however, the
possible. Symptoms can appear minutes after a diver sur-
lungs take in more nitrogen than usual. This happens
faces, and in about 80% of cases do so within eight
because the surrounding water pressure is greater than
hours. Pain is often the only symptom; this is sometimes
the air pressure at sea level (twice as great at 33 ft [10 m],
called the bends,although many people incorrectly use
for instance). As the water pressure increases,so does the
that term as a synonym for DCS itself. The pain,which
pressure of the nitrogen in the compressed air inhaled by
ranges from mild to severe, is usually limited to the
the diver. Because increased pressure causes an increase
joints,but can be felt anywhere. Severe itching(pruritis),
in gas density,the diver takes in more nitrogen with each
skin rashes, and skin mottling (cutis marmorata) are
breath than he or she would at sea level. Instead of being
other possible symptoms. All of these are sometimes
exhaled,however,the extra nitrogen safely dissolves into
classified as manifestations of type 1 or “mild” DCS.
the tissues,where it remains until the diver begins his or
type 2 or “serious”DCS can lead,among other things,to
her return to the surface (under some circumstances the
paralysis,brain damage,heart attacks,and death. Many
extra nitrogen can cause nitrogen narcosis,but that con-
DCS victims,however,experience both type 1 and type 2
dition is distinct from DCS). On the way up,decompres-
symptoms.
sion occurs (in other words,the water pressure drops),
and with the change in pressure,the extra nitrogen grad-
ually diffuses out of the tissues and is delivered by the
Diagnosis
bloodstream to the lungs,which expel it from the body. If
the diver surfaces too quickly,however,potentially dan- Diagnosis requires taking a medical history (ques-
gerous nitrogen bubbles can form in the tissues and cause tioning the patient about his or her health and recent
DCS. These bubbles can compress nerves,obstruct arter- activities) and conducting a physical examination.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1009
Decompression
sickness
travel after a dive. People who are obese, suffer from
KEY TERMS lung or heart problems,or are otherwise in poor health
should not dive. And because the effect of nitrogen diffu-
Gas embolism—The presence of a gas bubble in sion on the fetus remains unknown,diving while preg-
the bloodstream that obstructs circulation. nant is not recommended.
Hyperbaric chamber—A sealed compartment in
Resources
which air pressure is gradually increased and then
gradually decreased, allowing nitrogen bubbles to BOOKS
shrink and the nitrogen to safely diffuse out of Martin,Lawrence. Scuba Diving Explained:Questions and
body tissue. Answers on Physiology and Medical Aspects of Scuba
Diving.Flagstaff,AZ:Best Publishing,1997.
Lymphatic vessels—Vessels that carry a fluid
Piantadosi,Claude A. “Physical,Chemical,and Aspiration
called lymph from the tissues to the bloodstream.
Injuries of the Lung.”In Cecil Textbook of Medicine,ed. J.
Nitrogen narcosis—Also called “rapture of the Claude Bennett and Fred Plum. Philadelphia:W. B. Saun-
deep,” the condition is caused by increased nitro- ders Co.,1996.
gen pressure at depth and is characterized by
PERIODICALS
symptoms similar to alcohol intoxication. Arness,Mark K. “Scuba Decompression Illness and Diving
Fatalities in an Overseas Military Community.”Aviation,
Space,and Environmental Medicine(Apr. 1997):325-333.
Clenney,Timothy L.,and Lorenz F. Lassen. “Recreational
Treatment Scuba Diving Injuries.”American Family Physician(Apr.
1996):1761+.
DCS is treated by giving the patient oxygen and
ORGANIZATIONS
placing him or her in a hyperbaric chamber,an enclosure
American College of Hyperbaric Medicine. P.O. Box 25914-
in which the air pressure is first gradually increased and
130,Houston,Texas 77265. (713) 528-0657. <http://
then gradually decreased. This shrinks the bubbles and
www.hyperbaricmedicine.org>.
allows the nitrogen to safely diffuse out of the tissues.
Divers Alert Network. The Peter B. Bennett Center,6 West
Hyperbaric chamber facilities exist throughout the Unit- Colony Place,Durham,NC 27705. (800) 446-2671.
ed States. No matter how mild one’s symptoms may <http://www.diversalertnetwork.org>.
appear,immediate transportation to a facility is essential. Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society. 10531 Metropolitan
Treatment is necessary even if the symptoms clear up Ave.,Kensington,MD 20895. (301) 942-2980. <http://
before the facility is reached,because bubbles may still www.uhms.org>.
be in the bloodstream and pose a threat. DAN maintains
a list of facilities and a 24-hour hotline that can provide Howard Baker
advice on handling DCS and other diving emergencies.
Prognosis
Decongestants
DCS sufferers who undergo chamber treatment within
a few hours of symptom onset usually enjoy a full recovery.
Definition
If treatment is delayed the consequences are less pre-
dictable,although many people have been helped even after Decongestants are medicines used to relieve nasal
several days have passed. A 1992 DAN report on diving congestion (stuffy nose).
accidents indicated that full recovery following chamber
treatment was immediate for about 50% of divers. Some
Purpose
people,however,suffer numbness,tingling,or other symp-
toms that last weeks,months,or even a lifetime. In the Oki- A congested or stuffy nose is a common symptom of
nawa study,six of the 94 patients experienced “long-last- colds and allergies. This congestion results when mem-
ing”symptoms even after repeated chamber treatments. branes lining the nose become swollen. Decongestants
relieve the swelling by narrowing the blood vessels that
supply the nose. This reduces the blood supply to the
Prevention swollen membranes,causing the membranes to shrink.
The obvious way to minimize the risk of falling vic- These medicines do not cure colds or reverse the
tim to DCS is to follow the rules on safe diving and air effects of histamines—chemicals released as part of the
1010 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stnatsegnoceD
allergic reaction. They will not relieve all of the symptoms Special conditions
associated with colds and allergies,only the stuffiness.
People with certain medical conditions or who are
When considering whether to use a decongestant for taking certain other medicines can have problems if they
cold symptoms, keep in mind that most colds go away take decongestants. Before taking these drugs,be sure to
with or without treatment and that taking medicine is not let the physician know about any of these conditions:
the only way to relieve a stuffy nose. Drinking hot tea or
ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions
broth or eating chicken soup may help. There are also
to decongestants in the past should let his or her physi-
adhesive strips can be placed on the nose to help widen
cian know before these drugs or any similar drugs are
the nasal passages,making breathing through the nasal
prescribed. The physician should also be told about any
passages a bit easier when congestion is present.
allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other sub-
stances.
Precautions PREGNANCY. In studies of laboratory animals,some
decongestants have had unwanted effects on fetuses.
Decongestant nasal sprays and nose drops may However,it is not known whether such effects also occur
cause a problem called rebound congestion if used in people. Women who are pregnant or who plan to
repeatedly over several days. When this happens, the become pregnant should check with their physicians
nose remains stuffy or gets worse with every dose. The before taking decongestants.
only way to stop the cycle is to stop using the drug. The
stuffiness should then go away within about a week. BREASTFEEDING. Some decongestants pass into
Anyone who shows signs of severe rebound congestion breast milk and may have unwanted effects on nursing
should also contact his or her physician. babies whose mothers take the drugs. Women who are
breastfeeding should check with their physicians before
Do not use decongestant nasal sprays for more than using decongestants. If they need to take the medicine,it
three days. Decongestants taken by mouth should not be may be necessary to bottle feed the baby with formula
used for more than seven days. If the congestion has not while taking it.
gone away in this time,or if the symptoms are accompa-
nied by fever,call a physician. OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Anyone with heart
or blood vessel disease, high blood pressure, diabetes,
Do not use a decongestant nasal spray after the prod- enlarged prostate,or overactive thyroid should not take
uct’s expiration date. If the product has become cloudy decongestants unless under a physician’s supervision.
or discolored, throw it away and do not use it. Do not The medicine can increase blood sugar in people with
share droppers or spray bottles with anyone else,as this diabetes. It can be especially dangerous in people with
could spread infection. Do not let droppers and bottle high blood pressure,as it may increase blood pressure.
tips touch countertops or other surfaces.
Before using decongestants, people with any of
Some decongestants cause drowsiness. People who these medical problems should make sure their physi-
takes these drugs should not drive,use machines or do cians are aware of their conditions:
anything else that might be dangerous until they have
•glaucoma
found out how the drugs affect them.
•history of mental illness
In general,older people may be more sensitive to the
Decongestants may have a variety of side effects,
effects of decongestants and may need to take lower
and may also interact with other medications the patient
doses to avoid side effects. People in this age group
is taking.
should not take long-acting (extended release) forms of
decongestants unless they have previously taken a short-
acting form with no ill effects. Side effects
Children may also be more sensitive to the effects of DECONGESTANT NASAL SPRAYS AND NOSE DROPS.
decongestants. Before giving any decongestant to a The most common side effects from decongestant nasal
child,check the package label carefully. Some of these sprays and nose drops are sneezing and temporary burn-
medicines are too strong for use in children. Serious side ing,stinging,or dryness. These effects are usually tem-
effects are possible if they are given large amounts of porary and do not need medical attention. If any of the
these drugs or if they swallow nose drops,nasal spray or following side effects occur after using a decongestant
eye drops. If this happens,call a physician or poison cen- nasal spray or nose drops,stop using the medicine imme-
ter immediately. diately and call the physician:
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1011
Decongestants
•increased blood pressure •Caffeine.
•headache In addition,anyone who takes decongestants should
let the physician know all other medicines he or she is
•fast,slow,or fluttery heartbeat
taking. Among the drugs that may interact with decon-
•nervousness
gestants are:
•dizziness
•tricyclic antidepressants such as imipramine (Tofranil)
•nausea or desipramine (Norpramin)
•sleep problems •the antidepressant maprotiline (Ludiomil)
DECONGESTANTS TAKEN BY MOUTH. The most •amantadine (Symmetrel)
common side effects of decongestants taken by mouth
•amphetamines
are nervousness, restlessness, excitability, dizziness,
drowsiness,headache,nausea,weakness,and sleep prob-
•medicine to relieve asthmaor other breathing problems
lems. Anyone who has these symptoms while taking •methylphenidate (Ritalin)
decongestants should stop taking them immediately.
•appetite suppressants
Patients who have these symptoms while taking
•other medicine for colds,sinus problems,hay fever or
decongestants should call the physician immediately:
other allergies
•increased blood pressure
•beta-blockers such as atenolol (Tenormin) and propra-
•fast,irregular,or fluttery heartbeat
nolol (Inderal)
•severe headache
•digitalis glycosides,used to treat heart conditions
•tightness or discomfort in the chest
The list above does not include every drug that may
•breathing problems interact with decongestants. Be sure to check with a
physician or pharmacist before combining decongestants
•fear or anxiety
with any other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-
•hallucinations counter) medicine.
•trembling or shaking
•convulsions (seizures) Description
•pale skin
Decongestants are sold in many forms, including
•painful or difficult urination tablets, capsules, caplets, gelcaps, liqui-caps, liquids,
nasal sprays,and nose drops. These drugs are sometimes
Other side effects may occur. Anyone who has
combined with other medicines in cold and allergy prod-
unusual symptoms after taking a decongestant should get
ucts designed to relieve several symptoms. Some decon-
in touch with his or her physician.
gestant products require a physician’s prescription,but
there are also many nonprescription (over-the-counter)
Interactions with other medicines
products. Ask a physician or pharmacist about choosing
Decongestants may interact with a variety of other an appropriate decongestant.
medicines. When this happens,the effects of one or both
Commonly used decongestants include oxymetazo-
of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects may
line (Afrin and other brands) and pseudoephedrine
be greater. Do not take decongestants at the same time as
(Sudafed,Actifed,and other brands). The decongestant
these drugs:
oxymetazoline is also used in some eye drops to relieve
•Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhibitors) such redness and itching.
as phenzeline (Nardil) or tranylcypromine (Parnate),
The recommended dosage depends on the drug.
used to treat conditions including depression and
Check with the physician who prescribed the drug or the
Parkinson’s disease. Do not take decongestants at the
pharmacist who filled the prescription for the correct
same time as a MAO inhibitor or within two weeks of
dosage,and always take the medicine exactly as directed.
stopping treatment with an MAO inhibitor unless a
If using nonprescription (over-the-counter) types,follow
physician approves.
the directions on the package label or ask a pharmacist
•Other products containing the same or other deconges- for assistance. Never take larger or more frequent doses,
tants. and do not take the drug for longer than directed.
1012 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stnatsegnoceD
Description
KEY TERMS
Deep vein thrombosis is a common but difficult to
detect illness that can be fatal if not treated effectively.
Fetus—A developing baby inside the womb.
According to the American Heart Association,more than
Hallucination—A false or distorted perception of two million Americans develop deep vein thrombosis
objects, sounds, or events that seems real. Hallu- annually. An estimated 600,000 of these develop pul-
cinations usually result from drugs or mental dis- monary embolism, a potentially fatal complication
orders. where the blood clots break off and form pulmonary
emboli,plugs that block the lung arteries. Sixty thousand
people die of pulmonary embolismeach year. Deep vein
thrombosis is also called venous thromboembolism,
Risks thrombophlebitisor phlebothrombosis.
Anyone considering taking a decongestant should Deep vein thrombosis is a major complication in
take a close look at the labels of any already in their med- patients who have had orthopedic surgery or pelvic,
icine cabinet. In 2000,the Food and Drug Administration abdominal, or thoracic surgery. Patients with cancer
prohibited over-the-counter sales of medicines contain- and other chronic illnesses (including congestive heart
ing the decongestant phenylpropanolamine. The medi- failure), as well as those who have suffered a recent
cine is associated with an increased risk of strokein peo- myocardial infarction,are also at high risk for develop-
ple ages 18 to 49,especially women. Many cold reme- ing DVT. Deep vein thrombosis can be chronic, with
dies contained this medicine. Contact a pharmacist if recurrent episodes.
there is any question about the ingredients in a medica-
tion. Over-the-counter remedies containing phenyl-
Causes and symptoms
propanolamine should be discarded.
Deep vein thrombosis is caused by blood clots in
blood vessels that form in veins where blood flow is
Normal results
sluggish or has been disturbed,in pockets in the calf’s
The desired result when taking decongestants is the deep veins, or in veins that have been traumatized.
short-term relief of nasal congestion. Symptoms include swelling and tenderness of the calf or
thigh, and possibly warmth. Only 23–50% of patients
Resources experience symptoms,so it’s often “silent.”Some indi-
viduals and families have underlying clotting tendencies
PERIODICALS
that can be tested for.
“An Ingredient Under Fire:Drugmakers are Jittery After an
FDA Panel Ruling.”Newsweek(October 30,2000):59.
Henderson,Charles W. “Voluntary Withdrawal of Cold and Diagnosis
Allergy Products Announced.”Medical Letter on the CDC
and FDA(November 26,2000). Deep vein thrombosis can be detected through
venography and radionuclide venography, Doppler
OTHER
ultrasonography, and impedance plethysmography.
“Medline Plus Health Information”.U.S. National Library of
Venography is the most accurate test,but it is not used
Medicine. <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus>.
much, because it is often painful, expensive, exposes
the patient to radiation, and can cause reactions and
Deanna M. Swartout-Corbeil,RN
complications. Venography identifies the location,
extent,and degree of attachment of the blood clots,and
Decubitus ulcers see Bedsores
enables the condition of the deep leg veins to be
assessed. A contrast solution is injected into a foot vein
through a catheter. The physician observes the move-
ment of the solution through the vein with a fluoro-
scope while a series of x rays are taken. Venography
Deep vein thrombosis
takes 30–45 minutes and can be done in a physician’s
office,a laboratory,or a hospital. Radionuclide venog-
Definition
raphy, in which a radioactive isotope is injected, is
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is a blood clot in a occasionally used,especially if a patient has had reac-
major vein,usually in the legs and/or pelvis. tions to contrast solutions.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1013
Deep
vein
thrombosis
KEY TERMS
Pulmonary embolism —An obstruction of a blood
vessel in the lungs, usually caused by a blood clot
that blocks a coronary artery. Pulmonary embolism
can be very serious and, in some cases, fatal.
Thrombosis—The development of a blood clot
inside a blood vessel.
Treatment
Deep vein thrombosis can be treated with drug ther-
apy,bed rest,and gradient elastic stockings. Medications
include anticoagulants that “thin”blood to prevent fur-
ther growth of blood clots, as well as clot-dissolving
drugs. Heparin is a common injectable anticoagulant,
and is usually followed by coumadin tablets for at least
three months. Bed rest with the patient’s legs elevated is
necessary until the condition improves. Gradient elastic
stockings should then be worn, and standing for long
periods of time avoided. In some cases,a filter is placed
in the major vein (the inferior vena cava) to trap emboli
or clots before they get to the heart and lungs.
Alternative treatment
Deep vein thrombosis can be life-threatening and
must be treated with conventional medical therapies.
However,there are alternative therapies that can be used
in conjunction with emergency treatments to dissolve the
clot that help support the body and prevent recurrence. A
trained alternative health care practitioner should be con-
Doppler ultrasonography is usually the preferred
sulted due to the severity of this condition.
procedure for detecting deep vein thrombosis. This tech-
nique uses sound waves to measure blood flow through
leg veins and arteries. A blood pressure cuff is wrapped Prognosis
around the patient’s ankle and a transducer with gel on it
In many cases,deep vein thrombosis can be success-
is placed over pulse points of the foot and lower leg.
fully treated if diagnosed early.
High-frequency sounds bounce off the soft tissue, and
the echoes are converted into images on a monitor. It is
Prevention
very accurate in detecting clots above the knee that can
become pulmonary embolisms. Usually performed in a Deep vein thrombosis can be prevented through pro-
physician’s office or hospital outpatient diagnostic cen- phylactic anticoagulant drugs and venous stasis prevention
ter,Doppler ultrasound usually takes 30–45 minutes. with gradient elastic stockings and intermittent pneumatic
compression of the legs. High-risk patients often need to
Impedance plethysmography records changes in
remain on anticoagulants like Coumadin indefinitely.
blood volume and vessel resistance. A blood pressure
cuff is wrapped around the leg above the knee,four elec-
trodes are placed near the knee and the ankle, and the Resources
cuff is inflated. How efficiently the veins return to nor- BOOKS
mal is measured. Performed in a physician’s office, it DeBakey,Michael E.,and Antonio M. Gotto Jr. “Invasive
takes about 15 minutes. Diagnostic Procedures”and “Diseases of the Vein.”In The
1014 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisobmorht
niev
peeD
This illustration features a dissected human lower leg show-
ing clot formation (thrombosis) along the length of a vein.
(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
New Living Heart.Holbrook,MA:Adams Media Corpo-
ration,1997.
Texas Heart Institute. “Diseases of the Peripheral Arteries and
Veins.”In Texas Heart Institute Heart Owner’s Handbook.
New York:John Wiley & Sons,1996.
“Venous Imaging.”In Diagnostic Nuclear Medicine.3rd ed.
Baltimore:Williams & Wilkins,1996.
“Venous Thromboembolism.”In Mayo Clinic Practice of Car-
diology.3rd ed. St. Louis:Mosby,1996.
PERIODICALS
Barloon,T. J.,G. R. Bergus,and J. Seabold. “Diagnostic Imag-
ing of Lower Limb,Deep Venous Thrombosis.”American
Family Physician56 (1 September 1997):791-801.
Davidson,Bruce L.,and Eric J. Deppert. “Ultrasound for the
Diagnosis of Deep Vein Thrombosis:Where to Now?”
British Medical Journal316 (3 January 1998):2.
Lori De Milto
defibrillation is crucial to the patient’s survival, the
Deer-fly fever see Tularemia American Heart Association has called for the integra-
tion of defibrillation into an effective emergency cardiac
care system. The system should include early access,
early cardiopulmonary resuscitation,early defibrilla-
tion,and early advanced cardiac care.
Defibrillation
Defibrillators deliver a brief electric shock to the
Definition heart, which enables the heart’s natural pacemaker to
regain control and establish a normal heart rhythm. The
Defibrillation is a process in which an electronic
defibrillator is an electronic device with electrocardio-
device sends an electric shock to the heart to stop an
gram leads and paddles. During defibrillation,the pad-
extremely rapid,irregular heartbeat,and restore the nor-
dles are placed on the patient’s chest, caregivers stand
mal heart rhythm.
back, and the electric shock is delivered. The patient’s
pulse and heart rhythm are continually monitored. Med-
Purpose ications to treat possible causes of the abnormal heart
Defibrillation is performed to correct life-threaten- rhythm may be administered. Defibrillation continues
ing fibrillations of the heart,which could result in car- until the patient’s condition stabilizes or the procedure is
diac arrest. It should be performed immediately after ordered to be discontinued.
identifying that the patient is experiencing a cardiac Early defibrillators,about the size and weight of a
emergency,has no pulse,and is unresponsive. car battery,were used primarily in ambulances and hos-
pitals. The American Heart Association now advocates
Precautions public access defibrillation; this calls for placing auto-
mated external defibrillators (AEDS) in police vehicles,
Defibrillation should not be performed on a patient
airplanes,and at public events,etc. The AEDS are small-
who has a pulse or is alert, as this could cause a lethal
er,lighter,less expensive,and easier to use than the early
heart rhythm disturbance or cardiac arrest. The paddles
defibrillators. They are computerized to provide simple,
used in the procedure should not be placed on a woman’s
verbal instructions to the operator and to make it impos-
breasts or over a pacemaker.
sible to deliver a shock to a patient whose heart is not fib-
rillating. The placement of AEDs is likely to expand to
Description
many public locations.
Fibrillations cause the heart to stop pumping blood,
leading to brain damage and/or cardiac arrest. About
Preparation
10% of the ability to restart the heart is lost with every
minute that the heart stays in fibrillation. Death can After help is called for,cardiopulmonary resuscita-
occur in minutes unless the normal heart rhythm is tion (CPR) is begun and continued until the caregivers
restored through defibrillation. Because immediate arrive and set up the defibrillator. Electrocardiogram
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1015
Defibrillation
Defibrillation by paddles.(Photograph by Patricia Barber, RBP,
Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
OTHER
KEY TERMS “AARC Clinical Practice Guideline:Defibrillation During
Resuscitation.”American Association of Respiratory
Care.29 Apr. 1998 <http://www.hsc.missouri.edu/~
Cardiac arrest—A condition in which the heart
shrp/rtwww/rcweb/aarc/ddrcpg.html>.
stops functioning. Fibrillation can lead to cardiac
“Defibrillation.”American Heart Association.1997. 9 Apr.
arrest if not corrected quickly.
1998 <http://www.americanheart.org>.
Fibrillation—Very rapid contractions or twitching
of small muscle fibers in the heart. Lori De Milto
Pacemaker—A surgically implanted electronic
Definitive cancer therapy see Cancer
device that sends out electrical impulses to regu-
therapy, definitive
late a slow or erratic heartbeat.
Degenerative arthritis see Osteoarthritis
leads are attached to the patient’s chest. Gel or paste is
applied to the defibrillator paddles,or two gel pads are
placed on the patient’s chest. The caregivers verify lack
of a pulse,and select a charge.
Dehydration
Aftercare Definition
After defibrillation,the patient’s cardiac status,breath- Dehydration is the loss of water and salts essential
ing,and vital signs are monitored until he or she is stable. for normal body function.
Typically,this monitoring takes place after the patient has
been removed to an intensive care or cardiac care unit in a
hospital. An electrocardiogram and chest x rayare taken. Description
The patient’s skin is cleansed to remove gel or paste,and,if
Dehydration occurs when the body loses more fluid
necessary,ointment is applied to burns. An intravenous
than it takes in. This condition can result from illness; a
line provides additional medication,as needed.
hot,dry climate; prolonged exposure to sun or high tem-
peratures; not drinking enough water; and overuse of
Risks diuretics or other medications that increase urination.
Dehydration can upset the delicate fluid-salt balance
Skin burns from the defibrillator paddles are the
needed to maintain healthy cells and tissues.
most common complication of defibrillation. Other risks
include injury to the heart muscle, abnormal heart Water accounts for about 60% of a man’s body
rhythms,and blood clots. weight. It represents about 50% of a woman’s weight.
Young and middle-aged adults who drink when they’re
thirsty do not generally have to do anything more to
Resources
maintain their body’s fluid balance. Children need more
BOOKS water because they expend more energy,but most chil-
Giuliani,E. R.,et. al.,eds. “Arrhythmias.”In Mayo Clinic
dren who drink when they are thirsty get as much water
Practice of Cardiology.3rd ed. Ed. E.R. Giuliani. St.
as their systems require.
Louis:Mosby,1996.
PERIODICALS
Age and dehydration
Matarese,Leonard. “Police and AEDS:A Chance to Save
Thousands of Lives Each Year.”Public Management79 Adults over the age of 60 who drink only when they
(June 1997):4. are thirsty probably get only about 90% of the fluid they
“Medical Breakthroughs That Could Save Your Life.”Body need. Developing a habit of drinking only in response to
Bulletin(Feb. 1998):1. the body’s thirst signals raises an older person’s risk of
“Upping the Odds of Survival.”Hospitals and Health Networks
becoming dehydrated. Seniors who have relocated to
71 (5 June 1997):13.
areas where the weather is warmer or dryer than the cli-
ORGANIZATIONS mate they are accustomed to are even likelier to become
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX dehydrated unless they make it a practice to drink even
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>. when they are not thirsty.
1016 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitardyheD
Dehydration in children usually results from losing •disease of the adrenal glands,which regulate the body’s
large amounts of fluid and not drinking enough water to water and salt balance and the function of many organ
replace the loss. This condition generally occurs in chil- systems
dren who have stomach flu characterized by vomiting
•diabetes mellitus
and diarrhea, or who can not or will not take enough
•eating disorders
fluids to compensate for excessive losses associated with
fever and sweating of acute illness. An infant can •kidney disease
become dehydrated only hours after becoming ill. Dehy-
•chronic lung disease
dration is a major cause of infant illness and death
An infant who does not wet a diaper in an eight-
throughout the world.
hour period is dehydrated. The soft spot on the baby’s
head (fontanel) may be depressed. Symptoms of dehy-
Types of dehydration dration at any age include cracked lips, dry or sticky
mouth, lethargy, and sunken eyes. A person who is
Mild dehydration is the loss of no more than 5% of
dehydrated cries without shedding tears and does not
the body’s fluid. Loss of 5–10% is considered moderate
urinate very often. The skin is less elastic than it should
dehydration. Severe dehydration (loss of 10–15% of
be and is slow to return to its normal position after
body fluids) is a life-threatening condition that requires
being pinched.
immediate medical care.
Dehydration can cause confusion,constipation,dis-
comfort,drowsiness,fever,and thirst. The skin turns pale
Complications of dehydration
and cold,the mucous membranes lining the mouth and
When the body’s fluid supply is severely depleted, nose lose their natural moisture. The pulse sometimes
hypovolemic shock is likely to occur. This condition, races and breathing becomes rapid. Significant fluid loss
which is also called physical collapse,is characterized by can cause serious neurological problems.
pale, cool, clammy skin; rapid heartbeat; and shallow
breathing.
Diagnosis
Blood pressure sometimes drops so low it can not be
The patient’s symptoms and medical history usual-
measured,and skin at the knees and elbows may become
ly suggest dehydration. Physical examination may
blotchy. Anxiety,restlessness,and thirst increase. After
reveal shock, rapid heart rate, and/or low blood pres-
the patient’s temperature reaches 107°F (41.7°C) damage
sure. Laboratory tests,including blood tests (to check
to the brain and other vital organs occurs quickly.
electrolyte levels) and urine tests (e.g.,urine specific
gravity and creatinine),are used to evaluate the severi-
ty of the problem. Other laboratory tests may be
Causes and symptoms
ordered to determine the underlying condition (such as
Strenuous activity,excessive sweating,high fever, diabetes or an adrenal gland disorder) causing the
and prolonged vomiting or diarrhea are common causes dehydration.
of dehydration. So are staying in the sun too long, not
drinking enough fluids,and visiting or moving to a warm
Treatment
region where it doesn’t often rain. Alcohol,caffeine,and
diuretics or other medications that increase the amount of Increased fluid intake and replacement of lost elec-
fluid excreted can cause dehydration. trolytes are usually sufficient to restore fluid balances in
patients who are mildly or moderately dehydrated. For
Reduced fluid intake can be a result of:
individuals who are mildly dehydrated, just drinking
•appetite loss associated with acute illness plain water may be all the treatment that is needed.
Adults who need to replace lost electrolytes may drink
•excessive urination (polyuria)
sports beverages (e.g., Gatorade or Recharge) or con-
•nausea sume a little additional salt. Parents should follow label
instructions when giving children Pedialyte or other
•bacterial or viral infection or inflammation of the phar-
commercial products recommended to relieve dehydra-
ynx (pharyngitis)
tion. Children who are dehydrated should receive only
•inflammation of the mouth caused by illness,infection, clear fluids for the first 24 hours.
irritation,or vitamin deficiency (stomatitis)
A child who is vomiting should sip one or two tea-
Other conditions that can lead to dehydration include: spoons of liquid every 10 minutes. A child who is less
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1017
Dehydration
than a year old and who is not vomiting should be given
one tablespoon of liquid every 20 minutes. A child who KEY TERMS
is more than one year old and who is not vomiting should
take two tablespoons of liquid every 30 minutes. A baby Electrolytes—Mineral salts, such as sodium and
who is being breast-fed should be given clear liquids for potassium, dissolved in body fluid.
two consecutive feedings before breastfeeding is
resumed. A bottle-fed baby should be given formula
diluted to half its strength for the first 24 hours after
developing symptoms of dehydration.
Alternative treatment
In order to accurately calculate fluid loss, it’s
Gelatin water can be substituted for electrolyte-
important to chart weight changes every day and keep a
replacement solutions. It is made by diluting a 3-oz
record of how many times a patient vomits or has diar-
package in a quart of water or by adding one-quarter
rhea. Parents should note how many times a baby’s dia-
teaspoon of salt and a tablespoon of sugar to a pint of
per must be changed.
water.
Children and adults can gradually return to their
normal diet after they have stopped vomiting and no
Prognosis
longer have diarrhea. Bland foods should be reintro-
duced first,with other foods added as the digestive sys- Mild dehydration rarely results in complications. If
tem is able to tolerate them. Milk, ice cream, cheese, the cause is eliminated and lost fluid is replaced, mild
and butter should not be eaten until 72 hours after symp- dehydration can usually be cured in 24–48 hours.
toms have disappeared.
Vomiting and diarrhea that continue for several days
without adequate fluid replacement can be fatal. The risk
Medical care
of life-threatening complications is greater for young
Severe dehydration can require hospitalization and children and the elderly. However, dehydration that is
intravenous fluid replacement. If an individual’s blood rapidly recognized and treated has a good outcome.
pressure drops enough to cause or threaten the develop-
ment of shock,medical treatment is usually required. A
Prevention
doctor should be notified whenever an infant or child
exhibits signs of dehydration or a parent is concerned Patients who are vomiting or who have diarrhea
that a stomach virus or other acute illness may lead to can prevent dehydration by drinking enough fluid for
dehydration. their urine to remain the color of pale straw. Ensuring
that patients always drink adequate fluids during an ill-
A doctor should also be notified if:
ness will help prevent dehydration. Infants and young
•a child less than three months old develops a fever
children with diarrhea and vomiting can be given elec-
higher than 100°F (37.8°C)
trolyte solutions such as Pedialyte to help prevent dehy-
•a child more than three months old develops a fever dration. People who are not ill can maintain proper
higher than 102°F (38.9°C) fluid balance by drinking several glasses of water
before going outside on a hot day. It is also a good idea
•symptoms of dehydration worsen
to avoid coffee and tea,which increase body tempera-
•an individual urinates very sparingly or does not urinate ture and water loss.
at all during a six-hour period
Patients should know whether any medication they
•dizziness,listlessness,or excessive thirst occur are taking can cause dehydration and should get prompt
•a person who is dieting and using diuretics loses more medical care to correct any underlying condition that
than 3 lb (1.3 kg) in a day or more than 5 lb (2.3 kg) a increases the risk of dehydration.
week Other methods of preventing dehydration and ensur-
When treating dehydration, the underlying cause ing adequate fluid intake include:
must also be addressed. For example,if dehydration is
•eating more soup at mealtime
caused by vomiting or diarrhea,medications may be pre-
•drinking plenty of water and juice at mealtime and
scribed to resolve these symptoms. Patients who are
between meals
dehydrated due to diabetes, kidney disease, or adrenal
gland disorders must receive treatment for these condi- •keeping a glass of water nearby when working or relax-
tions as well as for the resulting dehydration. ing
1018 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitardyheD
Resources by placing a series of adhesive patches on the skin con-
taining potential allergens, or allergy-causing sub-
BOOKS
stances.
Larson,David,E.,ed. Mayo Clinic Family Health Book.New
York:William Morrow,1990. •To assess the vitality of the T cell response as part of
OTHER the evaluation of immune system health in infection,
“Dehydration.”HealthAnswers.com.8 May 1998 <http://www. cancer,immune disorders,pre-transplantation screen-
healthanswers.com>. ing,aging,and malnutrition. DHT can help predict
“Dehydration.”Loyola University Health System.13 May 1998 survival in immunocompromised patients,and evalu-
<http://www.luhs.org>. ate the success of restorative therapy. Antigens used
“Dehydration.”ThriveOnline.8 May 1998 <http://thriveonline. for these tests must be ones the patient has been
oxygen.com>.
exposed to before,and,therefore,include inactivated
“Hydration—Getting Enough Water.”Loyola University
antigens from common infectious agents to which the
Health System.13 May 1998 <http://www.luhs.org>.
patient might have been exposed, such as mumps,
Candida albicans,tetanustoxoid,and trichophyton (a
Maureen Haggerty
skin fungus).
Delavirdine see Non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors
Precautions
No special precautions are necessary for most
patients. Those with known hypersensitivity to certain
skin irritants should alert the clinician performing the
Delayed hypersensitivity test. Some commercial preparations of fungal antigens
skin test contain mercury, a source of irritation to some
patients.
Definition
A delayed hypersensitivity test (DHT) is an immune
function test measuring the presence of activated T cells Description
that recognize a certain substance.
The most accurate TB test is the Mantoux test, in
which a small amount of TB antigen is injected into
Purpose the skin. The area is examined 48–72 hours after the
injection.
The immune system protects against infection by
viruses,bacteria,fungi,and parasites. After initial expo-
In the patch test,20–30 adhesive patches are usually
sure to a foreign substance,or antigen,the immune sys-
placed on the upper back. The patches are kept in place
tem creates both antibodies and sensitized T cells. Both
and the area is kept dry for 48 hours. The patches are
these immune agents respond when the body is reex-
then removed,and the skin is examined 24 hours after-
posed to the antigen. Antibodies,which are circulating
ward,and possibly again a day or more following that.
proteins,respond within minutes,to give what is termed
Patch testing is usually performed following a patient
an immediate hypersensitivity reaction. T cells’respons-
complaint of skin irritation from an unknown substance.
es occur over several days,and are thus called delayed
Testing may suggest several candidates; identifying the
hypersensitivity reactions. The cascade of events initiat-
right one requires careful review of the patient’s possi-
ed by the T cells leads to hardening (induration) and red-
ble exposure.
ness (erythema) at the injection site.
The test of overall T cell responsiveness is per-
A DHT is performed for one of three reasons:
formed with several injections. Each area injected is cir-
•To test for exposure to specific diseases,such as tuber- cled and marked. Results are read 48 hours after the
culosis(TB). Tuberculosis testing is done by injecting injection.
into the skin a small volume of TB antigen,which con-
tains no organisms (live or dead) but can still provoke
an immune response.
Preparation
•To test for allergic sensitivity to potential skin irritants,
such as poison ivy. Skin allergy testing is usually done No special preparation is necessary.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1019
Delayed
hypersensitivity
skin
test
Absence of any reaction to injected areas indi-
KEY TERMS cates lack of T cell responsiveness,a condition called
anergy. T cell anergy is seen in immune deficiency
Allergen—A foreign substance that provokes an diseases including AIDS, some cases of infectious
immune reaction in some sensitive people but not diseases, malignancies, immunosuppressive therapy
in most others. (including corticosteroid treatment), some autoim-
mune diseases, malnutrition,major surgery,and some
Anaphylaxis—An exaggerated, life-threatening
viral immunizations.
hypersensitivity reaction to a previously encoun-
tered antigen.
Resources
Antibody—An immune system protein made to
BOOKS
fight infection.
Davies,R.,and S. Ollier. Allergy:The Facts.Oxford University
Antigen—A foreign substance detected that pro-
Press,1989.
vokes an immune reaction. Lawlor Jr.,G. J.,et. al. Manual of Allergy and Immunology.
Little,Brown and Co.,1995.
Richard Robinson
Aftercare
Patches should be kept dry. Injection sites may be
washed,but excessive rubbing should be avoided. Patch-
es and injection sites may become reddened or irritated.
Delirium
If a patch causes severe itchingor discomfort,the patient
should remove it immediately.
Definition
Delirium is a state of mental confusion that develops
Risks
quickly and usually fluctuates in intensity.
DHT is quite safe for virtually all people. There is
no risk of infection from the agents injected,since they
Description
are purified antigens,not whole organisms. Life threaten-
ing, hypersensitive reactions (anaphylaxis) are a very Delirium is a syndrome, or group of symptoms,
small risk; patients should notify the administering caused by a disturbance in the normal functioning of the
physician immediately if signs of wheezing,swelling,or brain. The delirious patient has a reduced awareness of
diffuse redness of the skin develops. and responsiveness to the environment, which may be
manifested as disorientation,incoherence,and memory
Normal results
disturbance. Delirium is often marked by hallucinations,
delusions,and a dream-like state.
Absence of exposure to TB is indicated by absent or
Delirium affects at least one in 10 hospitalized
very little skin reaction; redness or hardness smaller than
patients,and is a common part of many terminal illness-
5 mm (about 0.25 in) is considered normal for a person
es. Delirium is more common in the elderly than in the
not exposed or infected with TB.
general population. While it is not a specific disease
Patch test sites should be normal or only slightly red. itself, patients with delirium usually fare worse than
T cell responsiveness tests should be positive; that is, those with the same illness who do not have delirium.
the injected areas should be reddened and hard. Two affect-
ed areas of 2 mm or more is considered a positive result. Causes and symptoms
Causes
Abnormal results
There are a large number of possible causes of delir-
TB exposure is indicated by a reaction of 10 mm or
ium. Metabolic disorders are the single most common
more. The degree of redness is not important. A 5–10
cause,accounting for 20–40% of all cases. This type of
mm area could indicate exposure if there is an underlying
delirium,termed “metabolic encephalopathy,”may result
risk to TB.
from organ failure, including liver or kidney failure.
Patch test areas that become reddened and irritated Other metabolic causes include diabetes mellitus,
indicate reaction to the substance in the patch. hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism, vitamin defi-
1020 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
muirileD
ciencies,and imbalances of fluids and electrolytes in the
blood. Severe dehydrationcan also cause delirium. KEY TERMS
Drug intoxication (“intoxication confusional state”)
is responsible for up to 20% of delirium cases, either Dementia—A loss of mental ability severe enough
from side effects,overdose,or deliberate ingestion of a to interfere with functioning. While dementia and
mind-altering substance. Medicinal drugs with delirium delirium have some of the same symptoms,
as a possible side effect or result of overdose include: dementia has a much slower onset.
•anticholinergics, including atropine, scopolamine, Electroencephalogram (EEG)— A chart of the
chlorpromazine (an antipsychotic), and diphenhy- brain wave patterns picked up by electrodes
dramine (an antihistamine) placed on the scalp. This is useful for diagnosing
central nervous system disorders.
•sedatives,including barbiturates,benzodiazepines,
and ethanol (drinking alcohol) Encephalopathy—A brain dysfunction or disorder.
•antidepressant drugs
•anticonvulsant drugs
•nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), •heavy metals,such as lead,mercury,and arsenic
including ibuprofen and acetaminophen •insecticides,such as Parathion and Sevin
•corticosteroids,including prednisone •mushrooms,such as Amanitaspecies
•anticancer drugs,including methotrexate and procar- •plants such as jimsonweed (Datura stramonium) and
bazine morning glory (Ipomoeaspp.)
•lithium •animal venoms
•cimetidine Other causes of delirium include:
•antibiotics •infection
•L-dopa •fever
Delirium may result from ingestion of legal or ille- •head trauma
gal psychoactive drugs,including:
•epilepsy
•ethanol (drinking alcohol)
•brain hemorrhage or infarction
•marijuana
•brain tumor
•LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) and other hallucino-
•low blood oxygen (hypoxemia)
gens
•high blood carbon dioxide (hypercapnia)
•amphetamines
•post-surgical complication.
•cocaine
•opiates,including heroin and morphine Symptoms
•PCP (phencyclidine) The symptoms of delirium come on quickly, in
•inhalants
hours or days,in contrast to those of dementia,which
develop much more slowly. Delirium symptoms typically
Drug withdrawal may also cause delirium. Delirium
fluctuate through the day,with periods of relative calm
tremens,or “DTs,”may occur during alcohol withdrawal
and lucidity alternating with periods of florid delirium.
after prolonged or intense consumption. Withdrawal
The hallmark of delirium is a fluctuating level of con-
symptoms are also possible from many of the psychoac-
sciousness. Symptoms may include:
tive prescription drugs.
•decreased awareness of the environment
Poisons may cause delirium (“toxic encephalopa-
•confusion or disorientation,especially of time
thy”),including:
•memory impairment,especially of recent events
•solvents,such as gasoline,kerosene,turpentine,ben-
zene,and alcohols •hallucinations
•carbon monoxide •illusions and misinterpreted stimuli
•refrigerants (Freon) •increased or decreased activity level
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1021
Delirium
•mood disturbance,possibly including anxiety,eupho- assistance before suddenly discontinuing an addictive
ria or depression drug such as alcohol or heroin; maintaining good nutri-
tion,which promotes general health and can minimize
•language or speech impairment
the likelihood of delirium from alcohol intoxication and
withdrawal; and avoiding exposure to solvents,insecti-
Diagnosis cides,heavy metals,or biological poisons in the home or
workplace.
Delirium is diagnosed through the medical history
and recognition of symptoms during mental status
examination. The most important part of diagnosis is Resources
determining the cause of the delirium. Tests may include
BOOKS
blood and urine analysis for levels of drugs,fluids,elec-
Guze,Samuel,ed. Adult Psychiatry.Mosby Year Book,1997.
trolytes,and blood gases,and to test for infection; lum-
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
bar puncture (“spinal tap”) to test for central nervous
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
system infection; x ray,computed tomography scans
(CT),or magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) scans to Richard Robinson
look for tumors,hemorrhage,or other brain abnormali-
ty; thyroid tests; electroencephalography(EEG); elec- Delta virus hepatitis see Hepatitis D
trocardiography(ECG); and possibly others as dictated
by the likely cause.
Treatment
Treatment of delirium begins with recognizing and Delusions
treating the underlying cause. Delirium itself is managed
Definition
by reducing disturbing stimuli, or providing soothing
ones; use of simple,clear language in communication; A delusion is an unshakable belief in something
and reassurance,especially from family members. Physi- untrue. These irrational beliefs defy normal reasoning,
cal restraints may be needed if the patient is a danger to and remain firm even when overwhelming proof is pre-
himself or others,or if he insists on removing necessary sented to dispute them. Delusions are often accompanied
medical equipment such as intravenous lines or monitors. by hallucinations and/or feelings of paranoia, which
Sedatives or antipsychotic drugsmay be used to reduce act to strengthen confidence in the delusion. Delusions
anxiety,hallucinations,and delusions. are distinct from culturally or religiously based beliefs
that may be seen as untrue by outsiders.
Prognosis
Persons with delirium usually have a worse prog- Description
nosis for the underlying disease than the person with-
Delusions are a common symptom of several mood
out delirium. Nonetheless,those without terminal ill-
and personality-related mental illnesses, including
ness usually recover from delirium. They may not,
schizoaffective disorder,schizophrenia,shared psy-
however, regain all their original cognitive abilities,
chotic disorder,major depressive disorder,and bipolar
and may be left with some permanent impairments,
disorder. They are also the major feature of delusional
including fatigue,irritability,difficulty concentrating,
disorder. Individuals with delusional disorder suffer
or mood changes.
from long-term,complex delusions that fall into one of
six categories: persecutory, grandiose, jealousy, ero-
Prevention tomanic, somatic, or mixed. There are also delusional
disorders such as dementiathat clearly have organic or
Prevention of delirium is focused on treating or
physical causes.
avoiding its underlying causes. The most preventable
forms are those induced by drugs. Strategies for reducing
Persecutory
delirium include following prescriptions,consulting the
prescribing physician immediately if symptoms occur, Individuals with persecutory delusional disorder are
and consulting the physician before discontinuing the plagued by feelings of paranoia and an irrational yet
drug,even if it has been ineffective; avoiding intoxica- unshakable belief that someone is plotting against them,
tion with legal or illegal drugs,and seeking professional or out to harm them.
1022 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoisuleD
Grandiose
KEY TERMS
Individuals with grandiose delusional disorder have
an over-inflated sense of self-worth. Their delusions cen-
Hallucinations—False or distorted sensory experi-
ter on their own importance,such as believing that they
ences that appear to be real perceptions.
have done or created something of extreme value or have
a “special mission.” Paranoia—An unfounded or exaggerated distrust
of others.
Jealousy
Shared psychotic disorder—Also known as folie à
Jealous delusions are unjustified and irrational deux; shared psychotic disorder is an uncommon
beliefs that an individual’s spouse or significant other has disorder in which the same delusion is shared by
been unfaithful. two or more individuals.
Erotomanic
Individuals with erotomanic delusional disorder
patient and administer one of several clinical inventories,
believe that another person, often a stranger, is in love
or tests,to evaluate mental status.
with them. The object of their affection is typically of a
higher social status,sometimes a celebrity. This type of
Treatment
delusional disorder may lead to stalking or other poten-
tially dangerous behavior. Delusions that are symptomatic of delusional disor-
der should be treated by a psychologist and/or psychia-
Somatic trist. Though antipsychotic drugs are often not effec-
tive,antipsychotic medication such as thioridazine (Mel-
Somatic delusions involve the belief that something
laril),haloperidol (Haldol),chlorpromazine (Thorazine),
is physically wrong with the individual. The delusion
clozapine (Clozaril),or risperidone (Risperdal) may be
may involve a medical condition or illness or a perceived
prescribed,and cognitive therapy or psychotherapy may
deformity. This condition differs from hypochondriasis
be attempted.
in that the deformity is perceived as a fixed condition not
a temporary illness. If an underlying condition such as schizophrenia,
depression, or drug abuse is found to be triggering the
Mixed delusions, an appropriate course of medication and/or
psychosocial therapy is employed to treat the primary
Mixed delusions are those characterized by two or
disorder. The medication, typically, will include an
more of persecutory,grandiose,jealousy,erotomanic,or
antipsychotic agent.
somatic themes.
Prognosis
Causes and symptoms
Delusional disorder is typically a chronic condition,
Some studies have indicated that delusions may be but with appropriate treatment,a remission of delusional
generated by abnormalities in the limbic system,the por- symptoms occurs in up to 50% of patients. However,
tion of the brain on the inner edge of the cerebral cortex because of their strong belief in the reality of their delu-
that is believed to regulate emotions. The exact source of sions and a lack of insight into their condition,individuals
delusions has not been conclusively found,but potential with this disorder may never seek treatment,or may be
causes include genetics,neurological abnormalities,and resistant to exploring their condition in psychotherapy.
changes in brain chemistry. Delusions are also a known
possible side effect of drug use and abuse (e.g.,ampheta- Resources
mines,cocaine,PCP).
BOOKS
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical
Diagnosis Manual of Mental Disorders.4th ed. Washington,DC:
American Psychiatric Press,Inc.,1994.
Patients with delusional symptoms should undergo a
Maxmen,Jerrold S.,and Nicholas G. Ward. “Schizophrenia
thorough physical examination and patient history to
and Related Disorders.”In Essential Psychopathology and
rule out possible organic causes (such as dementia). If a
Its Treatment.2nd ed. New York:W. W. Norton,1995.
psychological cause is suspected,a mental health profes- Siegel,Ronald K. Whispers:The Voices of Paranoia.New
sional will typically conduct an interview with the York:Crown,1994.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1023
Delusions
PERIODICALS enormous. Financial burdens include lost wages for fam-
Manschreck,Theo C. “Delusional Disorder:The Recognition ily caregivers, medical supplies and drugs, and home
and Management of Paranoia.”Journal of Clinical Psy- modifications to ensure safety. Nursing home care may
chiatry57,supplement 3 (1996):32-38. cost several thousand dollars a month or more. The psy-
chological cost is not as easily quantifiable but can be
ORGANIZATIONS
American Psychiatric Association. 1400 K Street NW,Washing- even more profound. The person with dementia loses
ton DC 20005. (888) 357-7924. <http://www.psych.org>. control of many of the essential features of his life and
American Psychological Association (APA). 750 First St. NE, personality,and loved ones lose a family member even as
Washington,DC 20002-4242. (202) 336-5700. <ttp:// they continue to cope with the burdens of increasing
www.apa.org>. dependence and unpredictability.
National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI). Colonial Place
Three,2107 Wilson Blvd.,Ste. 300,Arlington,VA 22201-
3042. (800) 950-6264. <http://www.nami.org>. Causes and symptoms
National Institutes of Mental Health (NIMH). 6001 Executive
Causes
Boulevard,Rm. 8184,MSC 9663
Dementia is usually caused by degeneration in the
Paula Anne Ford-Martin cerebral cortex, the part of the brain responsible for
thoughts, memories, actions and personality. Death of
brain cells in this region leads to the cognitive impair-
ment which characterizes dementia.
The most common cause of dementia is AD,
Dementia
accounting for half to three quarters of all cases. The
Definition brain of a person with AD becomes clogged with two
abnormal structures, called neurofibrillary tangles and
Dementia is a loss of mental ability severe enough to
senile plaques. Neurofibrillary tangles are twisted masses
interfere with normal activities of daily living, lasting
of protein fibers inside nerve cells, or neurons. Senile
more than six months, not present since birth, and not
plaques are composed of parts of neurons surrounding a
associated with a loss or alteration of consciousness.
group of proteins called beta-amyloid deposits. Why
these structures develop is unknown. Current research
Description indicates possible roles for inflammation, blood flow
restriction,and toxic molecular fragments known as free
Dementia is a group of symptoms caused by gradual
radicals. Several genes have been associated with higher
deathof brain cells. The loss of cognitive abilities that
incidences of AD,although the exact role of these genes
occurs with dementia leads to impairments in memory,
is still unknown.
reasoning, planning, and personality. While the over-
whelming number of people with dementia are elderly,it Vascular dementia is estimated to cause from 5–30%
is not an inevitable part of aging. Instead, dementia is of all dementias. It occurs from decrease in blood flow to
caused by specific brain diseases. Alzheimer’s disease the brain,most commonly due to a series of small strokes
(AD)is the most common cause,followed by vascular or (multi-infarct dementia). Other cerebrovascular causes
multi-infarct dementia. include:vasculitisfrom syphilis,Lyme disease,or sys-
temic lupus erythematosus; subdural hematoma; and
The prevalence of dementia has been difficult to
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Because of the usually sud-
determine, partly because of differences in definition
den nature of its cause,the symptoms of vascular demen-
among different studies,and partly because there is some
tia tend to begin more abruptly than those of Alzheimer’s
normal decline in functional ability with age. Dementia
dementia. Symptoms may progress stepwise with the
affects 5–8% of all people between ages 65 and 74,and
occurrence of new strokes. Unlike AD,the incidence of
up to 20% of those between 75 and 84. Estimates for
vascular dementia is lower after age 75.
dementia in those 85 and over range from 30–47%.
Between two and four million Americans have AD; that Other conditions which may cause dementia
number is expected to grow to as many as 14 million by include:
the middle of the twenty-first century as the population •AIDS
as a whole ages.
•Parkinson’s disease
The cost of dementia can be considerable. While
•Lewy body disease
most people with dementia are retired and do not suffer
income losses from their disease,the cost of care is often •Pick’s disease
1024 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aitnemeD
•Huntington’s disease •Decreased attention and increased restlessness. This
may cause the person with dementia to begin an activity
•Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
and quickly lose interest, and to wander frequently.
•brain tumor
Wandering may cause significant safety problems,when
•hydrocephalus combined with disorientation and memory losses. The
person may begin to cook something on the stove,then
•head trauma
become distracted and wander away while it is cooking.
•multiple sclerosis
•Personality changes and psychosis. The person may
•prolonged abuse of alcohol or other drugs lose interest in once-pleasurable activities,and become
•vitamin deficiency:thiamin,niacin,or B more passive,depressed,or anxious. Delusions,suspi-
12
cion,paranoia,and hallucinationsmay occur later in
•hypothyroidism
the disease. Sleep disturbances may occur, including
•hypercalcemia insomniaand sleep interruptions.
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Dementia is marked by a gradual impoverishment of
thought and other mental activities. Losses eventually Since dementia usually progresses slowly,diagnos-
affect virtually every aspect of mental life. The slow pro- ing it in its early stages can be difficult. Several office
gression of dementia is in contrast with delirium,which visits over several months or more may be needed. Diag-
involves some of the same symptoms, but has a very nosis begins with a thorough physical exam and com-
rapid onset and fluctuating course with alteration in the plete medical history,usually including comments from
level of consciousness. However, delirium may occur family members or caregivers. A family history of either
with dementia,especially since the person with dementia AD or cerebrovascular disease may provide clues to the
is more susceptible to the delirium-inducing effects of cause of symptoms. Simple tests of mental function,
may types of drugs. including word recall,object naming,and number-sym-
bol matching,are used to track changes in the person’s
cognitive ability.
Symptoms include:
Depression is common in the elderly and can be
•Memory losses. Memory loss is usually the first symp-
mistaken for dementia; therefore,ruling out depression is
tom noticed. It may begin with misplacing valuables
an important part of the diagnosis. Distinguishing
such as a wallet or car keys,then progress to forgetting
dementia from the mild normal cognitive decline of
appointments, where the car was left, and the route
advanced age is also critical. The medical history
home,for instance. More profound losses follow,such
includes a complete listing of drugs being taken,since a
as forgetting the names and faces of family members.
number of drugs can cause dementia-like symptoms.
•Impaired abstraction and planning. The person with
Determining the cause of dementia may require a
dementia may lose the ability to perform familiar tasks,to
variety of medical tests,chosen to match the most likely
plan activities,and to draw simple conclusions from facts.
etiology. Cerebrovascular disease, hydrocephalus, and
•Language and comprehension disturbances. The person
tumors may be diagnosed with x-rays,CT or MRI scans,
may be unable to understand instructions,or follow the
and vascular imaging studies. Blood tests may reveal
logic of moderately complex sentences. Later,he or she
nutritional deficiencies or hormone imbalances.
may not understand his or her own sentences,and have
difficulty forming thoughts into words.
•Poor judgment. The person may not recognize the con- Treatment
sequences of his or her actions or be able to evaluate the
Treatment of dementia begins with treatment of
appropriateness of behavior. Behavior may become rib-
the underlying disease,where possible. The underlying
ald, overly-friendly, or aggressive. Personal hygiene
causes of nutritional, hormonal, tumor-caused and
may be ignored.
drug-related dementias may be reversible to some
•Impaired orientation ability. The person may not be extent. Treatment for stroke-related dementia begins
able to identify the time of day, even from obvious by minimizing the risk of further strokes, through
visual clues; or may not recognize his or her location, smoking cessation,aspirintherapy,and treatment of
even if familiar. This disability may stem partly from hypertension,for instance. There are no therapies that
losses of memory and partly from impaired abstraction. can reverse the progression of AD. Aspirin,estrogen,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1025
Dementia
vitamin E,and selegiline are currently being evaluated and clozapine. Side effects of these drugs can be signifi-
for their ability to slow the rate of progression. cant. Antianxiety drugs such as Valium may improve
behavioral symptoms,especially agitation and anxiety,
Care for a person with dementia can be difficult and
although BuSpar has fewer side effects. The anticonvul-
complex. The patient must learn to cope with functional
sant carbamazepine is also sometimes prescribed for agi-
and cognitive limitations,while family members or other
tation. Depression is treated with antidepressants,usually
caregivers assume increasing responsibility for the per-
beginning with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
son’s physical needs. In progressive dementias such as
(SSRIs) such as Prozac or Paxil, followed by
AD, the person may ultimately become completely
monoamine oxidase inhibitorsor tricyclic antidepres-
dependent. Education of the patient and family early on
sants. Electroconvulsive therapymay be appropriate for
in the disease progression can help them anticipate and
some patients with severe depression who are unrespon-
plan for inevitable changes.
sive to drug therapy. In general,medications should be
Symptoms of dementia may be treated with a com-
administered very cautiously to demented patients,in the
bination of psychotherapy,environmental modifications,
lowest possible effective doses,to minimize side effects.
and medication. Drug therapy can be complicated by for-
Supervision of taking medications is generally required.
getfulness, especially if the prescribed drug must be
taken several times daily. Long-term institutional care may be needed for the
person with dementia,as profound cognitive losses often
Behavioral approaches may be used to reduce the
precede death by a number of years. Early planning for
frequency or severity of problem behaviors, such as
the financial burden of nursing home care is critical. Use-
aggression or socially inappropriate conduct. Problem
ful information about financial planning for long-term
behavior may be a reaction to frustration or overstimula-
care is available through the Alzheimer’s Association.
tion; understanding and modifying the situations that
trigger it can be effective. Strategies may include break- Family members or others caring for a person with
ing down complex tasks, such as dressing or feeding, dementia are often subject to extreme stress, and may
into simpler steps,or reducing the amount of activity in develop feelings of anger,resentment,guilt,and hopeless-
the environment to avoid confusion and agitation. Plea- ness,in addition to the sorrow they feel for their loved one
surable activities,such as crafts,games,and music,can and for themselves. Depression is an extremely common
provide therapeutic stimulation and improve mood. consequence of being a full-time caregiver for a person
with dementia. Support groups can be an important way
Modifying the environment can increase safety and
to deal with the stress of caregiving. The location and
comfort while decreasing agitation. Home modifications
contact numbers for caregiver support groups are avail-
for safety include removal or lock-up of hazards such as
able from the Alzheimer’s Association; they may also be
sharp knives, dangerous chemicals, and tools. Child-
available through a local social service agency or the
proof latches or Dutch doors may be used to limit access
patient’s physician. Medical treatment for depression may
as well. Lowering the hot water temperature to 120°F
be an important adjunct to group support.
(48.9°C) or less reduces the risk of scalding. Bed rails
and bathroom safety rails can be important safety mea-
sures,as well. Confusion may be reduced with simpler
Alternative treatment
decorative schemes and presence of familiar objects.
Covering or disguising doors (with a mural,for example) Several drugs are currently being tested for their
may reduce the tendency to wander. Positioning the bed ability to slow the progress of AD. These include
in view of the bathroom can decrease incontinence. acetyl-l-carnitine, which acts on the cellular energy
Two drugs, tacrine (Cognex) and donepezil (Ari- structures known as mitochondria; propentofylline,
cept), are commonly prescribed for AD. These drugs which may aid circulation; milameline,which acts sim-
inhibit the breakdown of acetylcholine in the brain,pro- ilarly to tacrine and donezepil; and ginkgo extract.
longing its ability to conduct chemical messages between
Ginkgo extract,derived from the leaves of the Gink-
brain cells. They provide temporary improvement in cog-
go bilobatree,interferes with a circulatory protein called
nitive functions for about 40% of patients with mild to
platelet activating factor. It also increases circulation and
moderate AD. Hydergine is sometimes prescribed as
oxygenation to the brain. Ginkgo extract has been used
well, though it is of questionable benefit for most
for many years in China and is widely prescribed in
patients.
Europe for treatment of circulatory problems. A 1997
Psychotic symptoms,including paranoia,delusions, study of patients with dementia seemed to show that
and hallucinations, may be treated with antipsychotic gingko extract could improve their symptoms,though the
drugs,such as haloperidol,chlorpromazine,risperidone, study was criticized for certain flaws in its method.
1026 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aitnemeD
Demyelinating disease see Multiple sclerosis
KEY TERMS
Donepezil—A drug commonly prescribed for
Alzheimer’s disease that provides temporary
improvement in cognitive functions for some
Dengue fever
patients with mild-to-moderate forms of the disease.
Definition
Ginkgo extract—Made from the leaves of the
Ginkgo biloba tree, this extract, used in other Dengue fever is a disease caused by one of a number
countries to treat circulatory problems, may of viruses that are carried by mosquitoes. These mosqui-
improve the symptoms of patients with dementia. toes then transmit the virus to humans.
Neurofibrillary tangles—Abnormal structures,
composed of twisted masses of protein fibers with- Description
in nerve cells, found in the brains of persons with
The virus that causes dengue fever is called an
Alzheimer’s disease.
arbovirus,which stands for arthropod-borne virus. Mos-
Senile plaques—Abnormal structures, composed
quitoes are a type of arthropod. In a number of regions,
of parts of nerve cells surrounding protein
mosquitoes carry this virus and are responsible for pass-
deposits, found in the brains of persons with
ing it along to humans. These regions include the Middle
Alzheimer’s disease.
East,the far East,Africa,and the Caribbean Islands. In
Tacrine—A drug commonly prescribed for Alz- these locations,the dengue fever arbovirus is endemic,
heimer’s disease that provides temporary improve- meaning that the virus naturally and consistently lives in
ment in cognitive functions for some patients with that location. The disease only shows up in the United
mild-to-moderate forms of the disease. States sporadically.
In order to understand how dengue fever is transmit-
ted,several terms need to be defined. The word “host”
means an animal (including a human) that can be infect-
Prognosis
ed with a particular disease. The word “vector”means an
The prognosis for dementia depends on the underly- organism that can carry a particular disease-causing
ing disease. On average,people with Alzheimer’s disease agent (like a virus or bacteria) without actually develop-
live eight years past their diagnosis, with a range from ing the disease. The vector can then pass the virus or bac-
one to 20 years. Vascular dementia is usually progressive, teria on to a new host.
with death from stroke,infection,or heart disease. Many of the common illnesses in the United States
(including the common cold,many viral causes of diar-
Prevention rhea, and influenza or “flu”) are spread because the
viruses that cause these illness can be passed directly
There is no known way to prevent Alzheimer’s dis-
from person to person. However,dengue fever cannot be
ease,although several of the drugs under investigation
passed directly from one infected person to another.
may reduce its risk or slow its progression. The risk of
Instead,the virus responsible for dengue fever requires
developing multi-infarct dementia may be reduced by
an intermediate vector,a mosquito,that carries the virus
reducing the risk of stroke.
from one host to another. The mosquito that carries the
arbovirus responsible for dengue fever is the same type
Resources of mosquito that can transmit other diseases,including
BOOKS yellow fever. This mosquito is called Aedes egypti. The
Jacques,Alan. Understanding Dementia.New York:Churchill most common victims are children younger than 10 years
Livingstone,1992. of age.
Mace,Nancy L.,and Peter V. Rabins. The 36-Hour Day.Balti-
more:John Hopkins University Press,1995.
Causes and symptoms
ORGANIZATIONS
Dengue fever can occur when a mosquito carrying
Alzheimer’s Association. 919 North Michigan Ave.,Suite 1000,
the arbovirus bites a human,passing the virus on to the
Chicago,IL 60611. (800) 272-3900. <http://www. alz.org>.
new host. Once in the body,the virus travels to various
Richard Robinson glands where it multiplies. The virus can then enter the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1027
Dengue
fever
bloodstream. The presence of the virus within the blood blood flow is called shock. Shock can result in damage to
vessels,especially those feeding the skin,causes changes the body’s organs (especially the heart and kidneys)
to these blood vessels. The vessels swell and leak. The because low blood flow deprives them of oxygen.
spleen and lymph nodes become enlarged,and patches of
liver tissue die. A process called disseminated intravascu-
Diagnosis
lar coagulation (DIC) occurs,where chemicals responsi-
ble for clotting are used up and lead to a risk of severe Diagnosis should be suspected in endemic areas when-
bleeding (hemorrhage). ever a high fever goes on for two to seven days,especially if
accompanied by a bleeding tendency. Symptoms of shock
After the virus has been transmitted to the human
should suggest the progression of the disease to DSS.
host,a period of incubation occurs. During this time (last-
ing about five to eight days) the virus multiplies. Symp- The arbovirus causing dengue fever is one of the few
toms of the disease appear suddenly and include high types of arbovirus that can be isolated from the serum of
fever, chills, headache, eye pain, red eyes, enlarged the blood. The serum is the fluid in which blood cells are
lymph nodes, a red flush to the face, lower back pain, suspended. Serum can be tested because the phase in
extreme weakness,and severe aches in the legs and joints. which the virus travels throughout the bloodstream is
longer in dengue fever than in other arboviral infections.
This initial period of illness lasts about two–three
A number of tests are used to look for reactions between
days. After this time, the fever drops rapidly and the
the patient’s serum and laboratory-produced antibodies.
patient sweats heavily. After about a day of feeling rela-
Antibodies are special cells that recognize the markers
tively well, the patient’s temperature increases again,
(or antigens) present on invading organisms. During
although not as much as the first time. A rash of small
these tests, antibodies are added to a sample of the
red bumps begins on the arms and legs,spreading to the
patient’s serum. Healthcare workers then look for reac-
chest,abdomen,and back. It rarely affects the face. The
tions that would only occur if viral antigens were present
palms of the hands and the soles of the feet become
in that serum.
swollen and turn bright red. The characteristic combina-
tion of fever,rash,and headache are called the “dengue
triad.” Most people recover fully from dengue fever, Treatment
although weakness and fatigue may last for several
There is no treatment available to shorten the course
weeks. Once a person has been infected with dengue
of dengue fever,DHF,or DSS. Medications can be given
fever,his or her immune system keeps producing cells
to lower the fever and to decrease the pain of muscle
that prevent reinfection for about a year.
aches and headaches. Fluids are given through a needle
More severe illness may occur in some people. in a vein to prevent dehydration. Blood transfusions
These people may be experiencing dengue fever for the may be necessary if severe hemorrhaging occurs. Oxy-
first time. However, in some cases a person may have gen should be administered to patients in shock.
already had dengue fever at one time, recovered, and
then is reinfected with the virus. In these cases,the first
Prognosis
infection teaches the immune system to recognize the
presence of the arbovirus. When the immune cells The prognosis for uncomplicated dengue fever is
encounter the virus during later infections,the immune very good, and almost 100% of patients fully recover.
system over-reacts. These types of illnesses, called However, as many as 6–30% of all patients die when
dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) or dengue shock syn- DHF occurs. The deathrate is especially high among the
drome (DSS),involve more severe symptoms. Fever and youngest patients (under one year old). In places where
headache are the first symptoms, but the other initial excellent medical care is available,very close monitoring
symptoms of dengue fever are absent. The patient devel- and immediate treatment of complications lowers the
ops a cough,followed by the appearance of small pur- death rate among DHF and DSS patients to about 1%.
plish spots (petechiae) on the skin. These petechiae are
areas where blood is leaking out of the vessels. Large
Prevention
bruised areas appear as the bleeding worsens and abdom-
inal pain may be severe. The patient may begin to vomit Prevention of dengue fever means decreasing the
a substance that looks like coffee grounds. This is actual- mosquito population. Any sources of standing water
ly a sign of bleeding into the stomach. As the blood ves- (buckets, vases, etc.) where the mosquitoes can breed
sels become more damaged,they leak more and continue must be eliminated. Mosquito repellant is recommended
to increase in diameter (dilate), causing a decrease in for those areas where dengue fever is endemic. To help
blood flow to all tissues of the body. This state of low break the cycle of transmission,sick patients should be
1028 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
revef
eugneD
Description
KEY TERMS
Dental trauma may be inflicted in a number of ways:
contact sports,motor vehicle accidents,fights,falls,eat-
Endemic—Naturally and consistently present in a
ing hard foods, drinking hot liquids, and other such
certain geographical region.
mishaps. As oral tissues are highly sensitive,injuries to
Host—The organism (such as a monkey or human) the mouth are typically very painful. Dental trauma
in which another organism (such as a virus or bac- should receive prompt treatment from a dentist.
teria) is living.
Vector—A carrier organism (such as a fly or mos- Causes and symptoms
quito) that delivers a virus (or other agent of infec-
Soft tissue injuries, such as a “fat lip,” a burned
tion) to a host.
tongue, or a cut inside the cheek, are characterized by
pain,redness,and swelling with or without bleeding. A
broken tooth often has a sharp edge that may cut the
tongue and cheek. Depending on the position of the frac-
placed in bed nets so that mosquitoes cannot bite them
ture, the tooth may or may not cause toothache pain.
and become arboviral vectors.
When a tooth is knocked out (evulsed), the socket is
swollen,painful,and bloody. A jawbone may be broken
Resources
if the upper and lower teeth no longer fit together proper-
BOOKS ly (malocclusion),or if the jaws have pain with limited
Douglas,R. Gordon. “Other Arthropod-Borne Viruses.”In ability to open and close (mobility), especially around
Cecil Textbook of Medicine,ed. J. Claude Bennett and the temporomandibular joint (TMJ).
Fred Plum. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Ray,C. George. “Arthropod-Borne and Other Zoonotic Virus-
Diagnosis
es.”In Sherris Medical Microbiology:An Introduction to
Infectious Diseases.3rd ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. Nor-
Dental trauma is readily apparent upon examination.
walk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1994.
Dental x rays may be taken to determine the extent of the
PERIODICALS damage to broken teeth. More comprehensive x rays are
Farley,Dixie. “Treating Tropical Diseases.”FDA Consumer needed to diagnose a broken jaw.
(Jan./Feb. 1997):26+.
ORGANIZATIONS Treatment
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd.,
Soft tissue injuries may require only cold compress-
NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435,(404) 639-3311.
es to reduce swelling. Bleeding may be controlled with
<http://www.cdc.gov>.
direct pressure applied with clean gauze. Deep lacera-
tions and punctures may require stitches. Pain may be
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
managed with aspirin or acetaminophen (Tylenol,
Dental caries see Tooth decay Aspirin Free Excedrin) or ibuprofen (Motrin,Advil).
Treatment of a broken tooth will vary depending on
Dental cavity see Tooth decay
the severity of the fracture. For immediate first aid,the
Dental hygiene see Oral hygiene injured tooth and surrounding area should be rinsed gen-
tly with warm water to remove dirt,then covered with a
Dental injuries see Dental trauma
cold compress to reduce swelling and ease pain. A dentist
should examine the injury as soon as possible. Any pieces
from the broken tooth should be saved and brought along.
If a piece of the outer tooth has chipped off,but the
inner core (pulp) is undisturbed,the dentist may simply
Dental trauma
smooth the rough edges or replace the missing section
with a small composite filling. In some cases,a fragment
Definition
of broken tooth may be bonded back into place. If
Dental trauma is injury to the mouth, including enough tooth is missing to compromise the entire tooth
teeth,lips,gums,tongue,and jawbones. The most com- structure,but the pulp is not permanently damaged,the
mon dental trauma is a broken or lost tooth. tooth will require a protective coverage with a gold or
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1029
Dental
trauma
porcelain crown. If the pulp has been seriously damaged,
the tooth will require root canal treatment before it KEY TERMS
receives a crown. A tooth that is vertically fractured or
fractured below the gumline will require root canal treat- Crown—1 The natural part of the tooth covered by
ment and protective restoration. A tooth which no longer enamel. 2 A restorative crown is a protective shell
has enough remaining structure to retain a crown may that fits over a tooth.
have to be extracted (surgically removed).
Eruption—The process of a tooth breaking through
When a permanent tooth has been knocked out, it the gum tissue to grow into place in the mouth.
may be saved with prompt action. The tooth must be
Evulsion—The forceful, and usually accidental,
found immediately after it has been lost. It should be
removal of a tooth from its socket in the bone.
picked up by the natural crown (the top part covered by
hard enamel). It must not be handled by the root. If the Extraction—The surgical removal of a tooth from
tooth is dirty, it may be gently rinsed under running its socket in the bone.
water. It should never be scrubbed,and it should never be Malocclusion—A problem in the way the upper
washed with soap, toothpaste, mouthwash, or other and lower teeth fit together in biting or chewing.
chemicals. The tooth should not be dried or wrapped in a
Pulp—The soft innermost layer of a tooth contain-
tissue or cloth. It must be kept moist at all times.
ing blood vessels and nerves.
The tooth may be placed in a clean container of
Root canal treatment—The process of removing
milk, cool water with or without a pinch of salt, or in
diseased or damaged pulp from a tooth, then fill-
saliva. If possible, the patient and the tooth should be
ing and sealing the pulp chamber and root canals.
brought to the dentist within 30 minutes of the tooth
loss. Rapid action improves the chances of successful Temporomandibular joint (TMJ)—The jaw joint
re-implantation; however,it is possible to save a tooth formed by the mandible (lower jaw bone) moving
after 30 minutes, if the tooth has been kept moist and against the temporal (temple and side) bone of the
handled properly. skull.
The body usually rejects re-implantation of a prima-
ry (baby) tooth. In this case,the empty socket is treated
as a soft tissue injury and monitored until the permanent
Prognosis
tooth erupts.
A broken jaw must be set back into its proper posi- When dental trauma receives timely attention and
tion and stabilized with wires while it heals. Healing may proper treatment,the prognosis for healing is good. As
take six weeks or longer,depending on the patient’s age with other types of trauma,infection may be a complica-
and the severity of the fracture. tion,but a course of antibiotics is generally effective.
Alternative treatment
Prevention
There is no substitute for treatment by a dentist or
Most dental trauma is preventable. Car seat belts
other medical professional. There are,however,homeo-
should always be worn, and young children should be
pathic remedies and herbs that can be used simultaneous-
secured in appropriate car seats. Homes should be moni-
ly with dental care and throughout the healing process.
tored for potential tripping and slipping hazards. Child-
Homeopathic arnica (Arnica montana) should be taken as
proofing measures should be taken,especially for tod-
soon as possible after the injury to help the body deal with
dlers. In addition to placing gates across stairs and
the trauma. Repeating a dose several times daily for the
padding sharp table edges, electrical cords should be
duration of healing is also useful. Homeopathic hyper-
tucked away. Young children may receive severe oral
icum (Hypericum perforatum) can be taken if nerve pain
burnsfrom gnawing on live power cords.
is involved, especially with a tooth extraction or root
canal. Homeopathic comfrey (Symphytum officinale)may Everyone who participates in contact sports should
be helpful in treating pain due to broken jaw bones,but wear a mouthguard to avoid dental trauma. Athletes in
should only be used after the bones have been reset. Cal- football, ice hockey, wrestling, and boxing commonly
endula (Calendula officinalis) and plantain (Plantago wear mouthguards. The mandatory use of mouthguards
major) can be used as a mouth rinse to enhance tissue in football prevents about 200,000 oral injuries annually.
healing. These herbs should not be used with deep lacera- Mouthguards should also be worn along with helmets in
tions that need to heal from the inside first. noncontact sports such as skateboarding,in-line skating,
1030 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
amuart
latneD
and bicycling. An athlete who does not wear a mouth-
guard is 60 times more likely to sustain dental trauma
than one who does. Any activity involving speed, an
increased chance of falling,and potential contact with a
hard piece of equipment has the likelihood of dental trau-
ma that may be prevented or substantially reduced in
severity with the use of mouthguards.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry. 211 East Chicago
Ave.,Ste. 700,Chicago,IL 60611-2616. (312) 337-2169.
<http://www.aapd.org>.
American Association of Endodontists. 211 East Chicago Ave.,
Ste. 1100,Chicago,IL 60611-2691. (800) 872-3636.
<http://www.aae.org>.
American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
9700 West Bryn Mawr Ave.,Rosemont,IL 60018-5701.
(847) 678-6200. <http://www.aaoms.org>. released. The mucus in the cervix (opening into the
American Dental Association. 211 E. Chicago Ave.,Chicago, uterus or womb) becomes thicker,making it difficult for
IL 60611. (312) 440-2500. <http://www.ada.org>. the sperm to enter. Depo-Provera and Lunelle also cause
the lining of the uterus to become thinner, making
Donald Gardner Barstow
implantation of a fertilized egg unlikely.
Depersonalization disorder see Dissociative An injection of Depo-Provera or Lunelle must be
disorders given within the first five days of a normal period. Depo-
Provera provides protection against pregnancy for three
months, while Lunelle provides similar protection for
one month. Ovulation (release of a mature egg) typically
occurs within 60 days of the last injection of Lunelle,
about twice as fast after use of Depo-Provera. Also,
Depo-Provera/Norplant
because Lunelle is a combined hormone contraceptive as
Definition opposed to progestin-only Depo-Provera and Norplant,it
is less likely to cause irregular or absent menstruation.
Norplant is a long-acting hormone that is inserted
under the skin and prevents conception for up to five Norplant capsules contain a synthetic hormone that
years. Depo-Provera is also a hormone,but is administered is slowly released over a period of up to five years. It
by intramuscular injection and provides protection against functions like Depo-Provera in that it prevents the
pregnancyfor three months. Lunelle is another injectable ovaries from producing ova (eggs) and also results in
contraceptive that is administered monthly (every 28 to 30 thicker mucus in the cervix, which prevents the sperm
days); it was approved by the Food and Drug Administra- from passing through the cervix. Norplant can be insert-
tion (FDA) in October 2000. The hormone in Norplant and ed at any time.
Depo-Provera is progestin,a synthetic hormone similar to
one found naturally in a woman’s body; Lunelle contains
Preparation
the hormones progestin and estrogen.
The woman being considered for Depo-Provera or
Purpose Lunelle will have a pelvic and breast examination,a Pap
test (a microscopic examination of cell samples taken
The purpose of these hormones is to prevent preg-
from the cervix), blood pressure check, weight check,
nancy; they are about 99% effective in achieving this
and a review of her medical history. Women who have
goal. No hormonal contraceptive methods provide protec-
diabetes mellitus, major depression, blood clotting
tion from AIDSor other sexually transmitted diseases.
problems,liver disease,or weight problems should use
Depo-Provera and Lunelle are given as an injection these methods only under strict medical supervision.
and work in several ways to prevent conception. First, Depo-Provera or Lunelle should not be used if the
the egg (ovum) is prevented from maturing and being woman is pregnant, has unexplained vaginal bleeding,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1031
Depo-Provera/Norplant
A physician inserts a contraceptive implant under the skin
of a woman’s arm.(Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by
permission.)
The main reactions to Norplant include headache,
KEY TERMS weight gain,irregular periods or no period at all,breast
tenderness, acne, gain or loss of facial hair, color
Hormone—A chemical produced in a gland or changes of the skin over the area of insertion,and ovari-
organ and transported by the blood to another area an cysts. The doctor should be notified immediately of
of the body where it produces a specific effect. lumps in the breast,heavy vaginal bleeding,yellowing of
the skin or eyes,or infection of the incision. Women who
Pap test—A microscopic examination of cell sam-
use Norplant are discouraged from smoking.
ples taken from the cervix.
Normal results
These hormone contraceptive methods normally
suffers from severe liver disease,has breast cancer,or result in a success rate of 99%.
has a history of blood clots or stroke.
Individuals who select Norplant will receive the Resources
same basic physical examination. If approved for this
BOOKS
method,a site of implantation will be selected (usually
Dickason,Elizabeth Jean,Bonnie Lang Silverman,and Judith
the inside of the upper arm), and the area prepared for
A. Kaplan. Maternal-Infant Nursing Care.3rd ed. St.
minor surgery. The skin will be washed with soap and
Louis:Mosby-Year Book,Inc.,1998.
water,and an antiseptic,such as iodine solution,will be
Gorrie,Trula Meyers,Emily Slone McKinney,and Sharon
applied. The physician will use a local anesthetic to Smith Murray. Foundations of Maternal-Newborn Nurs-
numb the area, a small incision will be made, the six ing.2nd ed. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Company,1998.
Norplant capsules will be inserted,and the incision sewn Nichols,Francine H.,and Elaine Zwelling. Maternal-Newborn
up (sutured). Protection against pregnancy normally Nursing:Theory and Practice.Philadelphia:W. B. Saun-
begins within 24 hours. If necessary,the implants can be ders Company,1997.
removed in 15–20 minutes. Norplant should not be used Olds,Sally B.,Marcia L. London,and Patricia Wieland
Ladewig. Maternal-Newborn Nursing:A Family Centered
by women who are pregnant,have blood clotting prob-
Approach.Menlo Park:Addison-Wesley,1996.
lems,or have unexplained vaginal bleeding. Advantages
include light periods with less cramping and decreased OTHER
anemia. This form of birth control may also be protective “Depo Provera.”Planned Parenthood of Western Washington.
against endometrial cancer. <http://www.ppww.org/depo.htm>.
“Lunelle.”Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Page.<http://
Because Depo-Provera and Norplant use only the
www.fda.gov/cder/foi/label/2000/20874lbl.pdf>.
hormone progestin,they may provide an alternative for
“Is Depo-Provera For You?”Planned Parenthood Federation of
women who can not use estrogen-containing birth con- America,Inc.<http://www.plannedparenthood.org/
trol pills. One benefit of Lunelle, however, is that its Library/birthcontrol/depoforyou.html>.
effects wear off more quickly than Depo-Provera, an
important factor in the event that a woman has serious Donald Gardner Barstow
side effects or wants to become pregnant.
Depression see Bipolar disorder;
Risks Postpartum depression
The most common side effects associated with
Depo-Provera and Lunelle are yellowing of the skin,
headache,nervousness,dizziness,abdominal pain,hair
loss,rash,increase in the number of migraine headaches,
Depressive disorders
increased or decreased interest in sexual intercourse,the
development of dark spots on the skin,depression,and
Definition
weakness. Danger signs that need to reported immediate-
ly include weight gain,heavy vaginal bleeding,frequent Depression or depressive disorders (unipolar depres-
urination, blurred vision, fainting, severe abdominal sion) are mental illnesses characterized by a profound
pain, and coughing up blood. Because the effects of and persistent feeling of sadness or despair and/or a loss
Depo-Provera may last up to 12 weeks, it may take a of interest in things that were once pleasurable. Distur-
longer time for women trying to conceive to become bance in sleep,appetite,and mental processes are a com-
pregnant after discontinuing the injections. mon accompaniment.
1032 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sredrosid
evisserpeD
Description
Everyone experiences feelings of unhappiness and
sadness occasionally. But when these depressed feel-
ings start to dominate everyday life and cause physical
and mental deterioration,they become what are known
as depressive disorders. Each year in the United
States, depressive disorders affect an estimated 17
million people at an approximate annual direct and
indirect cost of $53 billion. One in four women is like-
ly to experience an episode of severe depression in her
lifetime, with a 10–20% lifetime prevalence, com-
pared to 5–10% for men. The average age a first
tant. For example,it is speculated that,if an individual is
depressive episode occurs is in the mid-20s,although
abused and neglected throughout childhood and adoles-
the disorder strikes all age groups indiscriminately,
cence,a pattern of low self-esteem and negative thinking
from children to the elderly.
may emerge. From that,a lifelong pattern of depression
There are two main categories of depressive disor-
may follow.
ders:major depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder.
Heredity does seem to play a role in who develops
Major depressive disorder is a moderate to severe
depressive disorders. Individuals with major depression
episode of depression lasting two or more weeks. Indi-
in their immediate family are up to three times more
viduals experiencing this major depressive episode may
likely to have the disorder themselves. It would seem
have trouble sleeping,lose interest in activities they once
that biological and genetic factors may make certain
took pleasure in,experience a change in weight,have dif-
individuals pre-disposed or prone to depressive disor-
ficulty concentrating, feel worthless and hopeless, or
ders,but environmental circumstances may often trig-
have a preoccupation with deathor suicide. In children,
ger the disorder.
the major depression may appear as irritability.
While major depressive episodes may be acute External stressors and significant life changes,such
(intense but short-lived),dysthymic disorder is an ongo- as chronic medical problems, death of a loved one,
ing,chronic depression that lasts two or more years (one divorce or estrangement,miscarriage,or loss of a job,
or more years in children) and has an average duration of can also result in a form of depression known as adjust-
16 years. The mild to moderate depression of dysthymic ment disorder. Although periods of adjustment disorder
disorder may rise and fall in intensity,and those afflicted usually resolve themselves, occasionally they may
with the disorder may experience some periods of nor- evolve into a major depressive disorder.
mal,non-depressed mood of up to two months in length.
Its onset is gradual,and dysthymic patients may not be Major depressive episode
able to pinpoint exactly when they started feeling
Individuals experiencing a major depressive episode
depressed. Individuals with dysthymic disorder may
have a depressed mood and/or a diminished interest or
experience a change in sleeping and eating patterns,low
pleasure in activities. Children experiencing a major
self-esteem,fatigue,trouble concentrating,and feelings
depressive episode may appear or feel irritable rather
of hopelessness.
than depressed. In addition,five or more of the following
Depression can also occur in bipolar disorder,an symptoms will occur on an almost daily basis for a peri-
affective mental illness that causes radical emotional
od of at least two weeks:
changes and mood swings,from manic highs to depres-
•Significant change in weight.
sive lows. The majority of bipolar individuals experience
alternating episodes of maniaand depression. •Insomniaor hypersomnia (excessive sleep).
•Psychomotor agitation or retardation.
Causes and symptoms
•Fatigue or loss of energy.
The causes behind depression are complex and not
•Feelings of worthlessness or inappropriate guilt.
yet fully understood. While an imbalance of certain neu-
•Diminished ability to think or to concentrate,or indeci-
rotransmitters—the chemicals in the brain that transmit
siveness.
messages between nerve cell— is believed to be key to
depression,external factors such as upbringing (more so •Recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal and/or suicide
in dysthymia than major depression) may be as impor- attempts.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1033
Depressive
disorders
Signs Of Mental Depression
Depressed mood
Lack of interest or pleasure in daily activities
Significant weight loss (without dieting) or weight gain
Difficulty sleeping or excessive sleeping
Loss of energy
Feelings of worthlessness or guilt
Difficulty in making decisions
Restlessness
Recurrent thoughts of death
Along with an underlying feeling of depression,
people with dysthymic disorder experience two or more
of the following symptoms on an almost daily basis for a
period for two or more years (most suffer for five years),
or one year or more for children:
•under or overeating
•insomnia or hypersomnia
•low energy or fatigue
•low self-esteem
•poor concentration or trouble making decisions
•feelings of hopelessness
Diagnosis
In addition to an interview,several clinical invento-
ries or scales may be used to assess a patient’s mental
status and determine the presence of depressive symp-
toms. Among these tests are:the Hamilton Depression
Scale (HAM-D), Child Depression Inventory (CDI),
Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS), Beck Depression
Inventory (BDI), and the Zung Self-Rating Scale for
Depression. These tests may be administered in an out-
patient or hospital setting by a general practitioner,social
worker,psychiatrist,or psychologist.
Treatment
Major depressive and dysthymic disorders are typi-
cally treated with antidepressants or psychosocial thera-
py. Psychosocial therapy focuses on the personal and
interpersonal issues behind depression,while antidepres-
sant medication is prescribed to provide more immediate
relief for the symptoms of the disorder. When used
together correctly, therapy and antidepressants are a
powerful treatment plan for the depressed patient.
Dysthymic disorder
Antidepressants
Dysthymia commonly occurs in tandem with other
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
psychiatric and physical conditions. Up to 70% of dys-
such as fluoxetine (Prozac) and sertraline (Zoloft) reduce
thymic patients have both dysthymic disorder and major
depression by increasing levels of serotonin, a neuro-
depressive disorder, known as double depression. Sub-
transmitter. Some clinicians prefer SSRIs for treatment
stance abuse, panic disorders, personality disorders,
of dysthymic disorder. Anxiety,diarrhea,drowsiness,
social phobias,and other psychiatric conditions are also
headache, sweating, nausea, poor sexual functioning,
found in many dysthymic patients. Dysthymia is prevalent
and insomnia are all possible side effects of SSRIs.
in patients with certain medical conditions,including mul-
tiple sclerosis,AIDS,hypothyroidism,chronic fatigue Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) are less expensive
syndrome,Parkinson’s disease,diabetes,and post-car- than SSRIs,but have more severe side-effects,which may
diac transplantation. The connection between dysthymic include persistent dry mouth,sedation,dizziness,and
disorder and these medical conditions is unclear, but it cardiac arrhythmias. Because of these side effects,cau-
may be related to the way the medical condition and/or its tion is taken when prescribing TCAs to elderly patients.
pharmacological treatment affects neurotransmitters. Dys- TCAs include amitriptyline (Elavil),imipramine (Tofra-
thymic disorder can lengthen or complicate the recovery nil),and nortriptyline (Aventyl,Pamelor). A 10-day sup-
of patients also suffering from medical conditions. ply of TCAs can be lethal if ingested all at once,so these
1034 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sredrosid
evisserpeD Subgenual
prefrontal
cortex
Normal
Subgenual
prefrontal
cortex
Abnormal
Recent scientific research has indicated that the size of the
subgenual prefrontal cortex of the brain (located behind the
bridge of the nose) may be a determining factor in heredi-
tary depressive disorders.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators
Group.)
drugs may not be a preferred treatment option for patients
at risk for suicide.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors(MAOIS) such as
tranylcypromine (Parnate) and phenelzine (Nardil) block
the action of monoamine oxidase (MAO),an enzyme in
the central nervous system. Patients taking MAOIs must
cut foods high in tyramine (found in aged cheeses and
meats) out of their diet to avoid potentially serious
hypertensive side effects.
Heterocyclics include bupropion (Wellbutrin) and tra-
zodone (Desyrel). Bupropion should not be prescribed to
patients with a seizure disorder. Side effects of the drug
may include agitation, anxiety, confusion, tremor, dry
mouth, fast or irregular heartbeat, headache, low blood
pressure,and insomnia. Because trazodone has a sedative
effect,it is useful in treating depressed patients with insom-
nia. Other possible side effects of trazodone include dry
mouth,gastrointestinal distress,dizziness,and headache.
Psychosocial therapy
Psychotherapy explores an individual’s life to bring
to light possible contributing causes of the present
depression. During treatment, the therapist helps the
patient to become self-aware of his or her thinking pat-
terns and how they came to be. There are several differ-
ent subtypes of psychotherapy,but all have the common
goal of helping the patient develop healthy problem solv-
ing and coping skills.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy assumes that the
patient’s faulty thinking is causing the current depression
and focuses on changing the depressed patient’s thought
patterns and perceptions. The therapist helps the patient
identify negative or distorted thought patterns and the
emotions and behavior that accompany them,and then processes of the brain, consequently relieving depres-
retrains the depressed individual to recognize the think- sion. Headaches,muscle soreness,nausea,and confusion
ing and react differently to it. are possible side effects immediately following an ECT
procedure. Memory loss, typically transient, has also
been reported in ECT patients.
Electroconvulsant therapy
ECT, or electroconvulsive therapy, is usually
Alternative treatment
employed after all therapy and pharmaceutical treatment
options have been explored. However,it is sometimes used St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum) is used
early in treatment when severe depression is present and throughout Europe to treat depressive symptoms. Unlike
the patient refuses oral medication,or when the patient is traditional prescription antidepressants,this herbal anti-
becoming dehydrated,extremely suicidal,or psychotic. depressant has few reported side effects. Some users may
experience high blood pressure, headaches, stiff neck,
The treatment consists of a series of electrical pulses
nausea,and vomiting. As of early 1998,United States.
that move into the brain through electrodes on the
clinical trials organized by the National Institute of Men-
patient’s head. ECT is given under general anesthesia
tal Health were still in the planning phase. Its efficacy in
and patients are administered a muscle relaxant to pre-
severe depression is very uncertain.
vent convulsions. Although the exact mechanisms behind
the success of ECT therapy are not known,it is believed Homeopathic treatment can also be very therapuetic
that the electrical current modifies the electrochemical in treating depression. Good nutrition, proper sleep,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1035
Depressive
disorders
Positron emission tomography (PET) scans comparing a
normal brain with that of someone with a depressed mental
disorder.(Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
Maxmen,Jerrold S.,and Nicholas G. Ward. “Mood Disorders.”
KEY TERMS Essential Psychopathology and Its Treatment.2nd ed.
New York:W. W. Norton,1995.
Thompson,Tracy. The Beast:A Reckoning with Depression.
Hypersomnia— The need to sleep excessively; a
New York:GP Putnam,1995.
symptom of dysthymic and major depressive dis-
Whybrow,Peter C. A Mood Apart.New York:HarperCollins,
order.
1997.
Neurotransmitter—A chemical in the brain that
PERIODICALS
transmits messages between neurons, or nerve cells.
Hirschfeld,R. M.,et al. “The National Depressive and Manic-
Changes in the levels of certain neurotransmitters, Depressive Association Consensus Statement on the
such as serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine, Undertreatment of Depression.”The Journal of the Ameri-
are thought to be related to depressive disorders. can Medical Association277,no. 4 (1997):333-40.
Miller,Mark D. “Recognizing and Treating Depression in the
Psychomotor agitation—Disturbed physical and
Elderly.”Medscape Mental Health2,no. 3 (1997).
mental processes (e.g., fidgeting, wringing of hands,
Miller,Sue. “A Natural Mood Booster.”Newsweek,5 May
racing thoughts); a symptom of major depressive
1997:74-5.
disorder.
Sansone,Randy A. and Lori A. Sansone. “Dysthymic Disorder:
Psychomotor retardation—Slowed physical and The Chronic Depression.”American Family Physician,
mental processes (e.g., slowed thinking, walking, 53,no. 8 (June 1996):2588-96.
and talking); a symptom of major depressive dis- ORGANIZATIONS
order. American Psychiatric Association. 1400 K Street NW,Washing-
ton,DC 20005. (888) 357-7924. <http://www.psych.org>.
American Psychological Association (APA). 750 First St. NE,
Washington,DC 20002-4242. (202) 336-5700. <http://
exercise,and full engagement in life are very important www.apa.org>.
to a healthy mental state. National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI). Colonial Place
Three,2107 Wilson Blvd.,Ste. 300,Arlington,VA 22201-
3042. (800) 950-6264. <http://www.nami.org>.
Prognosis
National Depressive and Manic-Depressive Association
Untreated or improperly treated depression is the (NDMDA). 730 N. Franklin St.,Suite 501,Chicago,IL
60610. (800) 826-3632. <http://www.ndmda.org>.
number one cause of suicide in the United States. Proper
National Institute of Mental Health. Mental Health Public
treatment relieves symptoms in 80–90% of depressed
Inquiries,5600 Fishers Lane,Room 15C-05,Rockville,
patients. After each major depressive episode,the risk of
MD 20857. (888) 826-9438. <http://www.nimh.nih.gov>.
recurrence climbs significantly—50% after one episode,
70% after two episodes, and 90% after three episodes.
Paula Anne Ford-Martin
For this reason,patients need to be aware of the symp-
toms of recurring depression and may require long-term
Dermabrasion see Skin resurfacing
maintenance treatment of antidepressants and/or therapy.
Prevention
Patient education in the form of therapy or self-help
groups is crucial for training patients with depressive dis- Dermatitis
orders to recognize symptoms of depression and to take
Definition
an active part in their treatment program. Extended main-
tenance treatment with antidepressants may be required Dermatitis is a general term used to describe inflam-
in some patients to prevent relapse. Early intervention mation of the skin.
with children with depression is effective in arresting
development of more severe problems.
Description
Resources Most types of dermatitis are characterized by an
itchy pink or red rash.
BOOKS
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Contact dermatitisis an allergic reaction to some-
Manual of Mental Disorders.4th ed. Washington,DC: thing that irritates the skin and is manifested by one or
American Psychiatric Press,Inc.,1994. more lines of red,swollen,blistered skin that may itch or
1036 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sititamreD
seep. It usually appears within 48 hours after touching or
brushing against a substance to which the skin is sensitive.
The condition is more common in adults than in children.
Contact dermatitis can occur on any part of the body,
but it usually affects the hands,feet,and groin. Contact
dermatitis usually does not spread from one person to
another, nor does it spread beyond the area exposed to
the irritant unless affected skin comes into contact with
another part of the body. However,in the case of some
irritants, such as poison ivy, contact dermatitis can be
passed to another person or to another part of the body.
Stasis dermatitis is characterized by scaly, greasy
looking skin on the lower legs and around the ankles. Sta-
sis dermatitis is most apt to affect the inner side of the calf.
Nummular dermatitis,which is also called nummular
eczematous dermatitis or nummular eczema, generally
affects the hands, arms, legs, and buttocks of men and Contact dermatitis can develop when the first con-
women older than 55 years of age. This stubborn tact occurs or after years of use or exposure.
inflamed rash forms circular, sometimes itchy, patches
Stasis dermatitis,a consequence of poor circulation,
and is characterized by flares and periods of inactivity.
occurs when leg veins can no longer return blood to the
Atopic dermatitisis characterized by itching,scal- heart as efficiently as they once did. When that happens,
ing,swelling,and sometimes blistering. In early child- fluid collects in the lower legs and causes them to swell.
hood it is called infantile eczema and is characterized by Stasis dermatitis can also result in a rash that can break
redness,oozing,and crusting. It is usually found on the down into sores known as stasis ulcers.
face,inside the elbows,and behind the knees.
The cause of nummular dermatitis is not known,but
Seborrheic dermatitis may be dry or moist and is it usually occurs in cold weather and is most common in
characterized by greasy scales and yellowish crusts on the people who have dry skin. Hot weather and stress can
scalp,eyelids,face,external surfaces of the ears,under- aggravate this condition,as can the following:
arms,breasts,and groin. In infants it is called “cradle cap.”
•allergies
•fabric softeners
Causes and symptoms
•soaps and detergents
Allergic reactions are genetically determined, and
•wool clothing
different substances cause contact dermatitis to develop
in different people. A reaction to resin produced by poi- •bathing more than once a day
son ivy, poison oak, or poison sumac is the most com- Atopic dermatitis can be caused by allergies,asth-
mon source of symptoms. It is,in fact,the most common ma,or stress,and there seems to be a genetic predisposi-
allergy in this country,affecting one of every two people tion for atopic conditions. It is sometimes caused by an
in the United States. allergy to nickel in jewelry.
Flowers, herbs, and vegetables can also affect the Seborrheic dermatitis (for which there may also be a
skin of some people. Burns and sunburn increase the genetic predisposition) is usually caused by overproduc-
risk of dermatitis developing,and chemical irritants that tion of the oil glands. In adults it can be associated with
can cause the condition include: diabetes mellitusor gold allergy. In infants and adults it
•chlorine may be caused by a biotin deficiency.
•cleansers
Diagnosis
•detergents and soaps
•fabric softeners The diagnosis of dermatitis is made on the basis of
how the rash looks and its location. The doctor may
•glues used on artificial nails
scrape off a small piece of affected skin for microscopic
•perfumes
examination or direct the patient to discontinue use of any
•topical medications potential irritant that has recently come into contact with
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1037
Dermatitis
Dermatitis on hands and fingers.(Custom Medical Stock
Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Patients who have a history of dermatitis should
KEY TERMS remove their rings before washing their hands. They
should use bath oils or glycerine-based soaps and bathe
Allergic reaction—An inappropriate or exaggerat- in lukewarm saltwater.
ed genetically determined reaction to a chemical Patting rather than rubbing the skin after bathing and
that occurs only on the second or subsequent thoroughly massaging lubricating lotion or nonprescrip-
exposures to the offending agent, after the first tion cortisone creams into still-damp skin can soothe red,
contact has sensitized the body. irritated nummular dermatitis. Highly concentrated corti-
Corticosteriod—A group of synthetic hormones sone preparations should not be applied to the face,
that are used to prevent or reduce inflammation. armpits,groin,or rectal area. Periodic medical monitoring
Toxic effects may result from rapid withdrawal after is necessary to detect side effects in patients who use such
prolonged use or from continued use of large doses. preparations on rashescovering large areas of the body.
Patch test—A skin test that is done to identify aller- Coal-tar salves can help relieve symptoms of num-
gens. A suspected substance is applied to the skin. mular dermatitis that have not responded to other treat-
After 24–48 hours, if the area is red and swollen, ments,but these ointments have an unpleasant odor and
the test is positive for that substance. If no reaction stain clothing.
occurs, another substance is applied. This is con-
Patients who have stasis dermatitis should elevate
tinued until the patient experiences an allergic
their legs as often as possible and sleep with a pillow
reaction where the irritant was applied to the skin.
between the lower legs.
Rash—A spotted, pink or red skin eruption that
Tar or zinc paste may also be used to treat stasis der-
may be accompanied by itching and is caused by
matitis. Because these compounds must remain in con-
disease, contact with an allergen, food ingestion,
tact with the rash for as long as two weeks,the paste and
or drug reaction.
bandages must be applied by a nurse or a doctor.
Ulcer—An open sore on the skin, resulting from
Coal-tar shampoos may be used for seborrheic der-
tissue destruction, that is usually accompanied by
matitis that occurs on the scalp. Sun exposure after the
redness, pain, or infection.
use of these shampoos should be avoided because the
risk of sunburn of the scalp is increased.
the affected area. Two weeks after the rash disappears,the
Alternative treatment
patient may resume use of the substances,one at a time,
until the condition recurs. Eliminating the substance most Some herbal therapies can be useful for skin condi-
recently added should eliminate the irritation. tions. Among the herbs most often recommended are:
If the origin of the irritation has still not been identi- •Burdock root (Arctium lappa)
fied,a dermatologist may perform one or more patch tests.
•Calendula (Calendula officinalis) ointment
This involves dabbing a small amount of a suspected irri-
•Chamomile (Matricaria recutita) ointment
tant onto skin on the patient’s back. If no irritation devel-
ops within a few days,another patch test is performed. The •Cleavers (Galiumssp.)
process continues until the patient experiences an allergic
•Evening primrose oil (Oenothera biennis)
reaction at the spot where the irritant was applied.
•Nettles (Urtica dioica)
Treatment Contact dermatitis can be treated botanically and
homeopathically. Grindelia (Grindelia spp.) and sas-
Treating contact dermatitis begins with eliminating
safras (Sassafras albidum) can help when applied topi-
or avoiding the source of irritation. Prescription or over-
cally. Determining the source of the problem and elimi-
the-counter corticosteroid creams can lessen inflamma-
nating it is essential. Oatmeal baths are very helpful in
tion and relieve irritation. Creams,lotions,or ointments
relieving the itch. Bentonite clay packs or any mud pack
not specifically formulated for dermatitis can intensify
draws the fluid out,and helps dry up the lesions. Corti-
the irritation. Oral antihistaminesare sometimes recom-
sone creams are not recommended.
mended to alleviate itching, and antibiotics are pre-
scribed if the rash becomes infected. Medications taken Stasis dermatitis should be treated by a trained prac-
by mouth to relieve symptoms of dermatitis can make titioner. This condition responds well to topical herbal
skin red and scaly and cause hair loss. therapies, however, the cause must also be addressed.
1038 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sititamreD
Selenium-based shampoos,topical applications of flax oil “Nummular Dermatitis.”The Skin Site.7 Apr. 1998 <http://
and/or olive oil,and biotin supplementation are among www.skinsite.com/info_nummular_dermatitis.htm>.
the therapies recommended for seborrheic dermatitis. “Poison Ivy,Oak,Sumac.”ThriveOnline.10 Apr. 1998 <http://
thriveonline.oxygen.com>.
“Stasis Dermatitis.”The Skin Site.7 Apr. 1998 <http://www.
Prognosis skinsite.com/info_stasis_dermatitis.htm>.
Dermatitis is often chronic,but symptoms can gen-
Maureen Haggerty
erally be controlled.
Dermatophyte infections see Ringworm
Prevention
Contact dermatitis can be prevented by avoiding the
source of irritation. If the irritant cannot be avoided com-
pletely,the patient should wear gloves and other protec-
tive clothing whenever exposure is likely to occur.
DES exposure
Immediately washing the exposed area with soap
and water can stem allergic reactions to poison ivy,poi- Definition
son oak,or poison sumac,but because soaps can dry the
DES (diethylstilbestrol) is a hormone that was pre-
skin,patients susceptible to dermatitis should use them
scribed for pregnant women in the 1950s and early
only on the face,feet,genitals,and underarms.
1960s. Many years later, doctors discovered that the
Clothing should be loose fitting and 100% cotton. daughters of the women who received DES were at high
New clothing should be washed in dye-free,unscented risk for a variety of problems,including infertility,pre-
detergent before being worn. mature labor,and cancerof the vagina and cervix.
Injury to the lower leg can cause stasis dermatitis to
ulcerate (form open sores). If stasis ulcers develop, a
Description
doctor should be notified immediately.
In the 1950s and early 1960s,several drug compa-
Yogaand other relaxation techniques may help pre-
nies claimed that DES (diethylstilbestrol) could prevent
vent atopic dermatitis caused by stress.
miscarriages. DES is a synthetic hormone, related to
Avoidance of sweating may aid in preventing sebor- estrogen. Since up to 20% of all pregnancies end in mis-
rheic dermatitis. carriage, this seemed like an important breakthrough
A patient who has dermatitis should also notify a and DES was prescribed for many women who had
doctor if any of the following occurs: bleeding in early pregnancy. Ultimately,it was found to
have no effect on miscarriages and the practice of pre-
•fever develops
scribing DES was stopped in the 1960s. Almost 10 years
•skin oozes or other signs of infection appear
later,the daughters of women who had taken DES during
•symptoms do not begin to subside after seven days’ pregnancy began to develop unusual symptoms.
treatment
Doctors discovered that when these young women
•he/she comes into contact with someone who has a reached their teens,they were at higher risk for a variety
wart,cold sore,or other viral skin infection of problems,including:
•clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina and cervix
Resources
•infertility
BOOKS
•premature labor and other problems in pregnancy
The Editors of Time-Life Books. The Medical Advisor:The
Complete Guide to Alternative and Conventional Treat-
ments.Alexandria,VA:Time Life,Inc.,1996.
Causes and symptoms
New Choices in Natural Healing.Ed. Bill Gottlieb,et al.
Emmaus,PA:Rodale Press,1995. DES has affected a very specific group of women.
These are women who were exposed to DES in utero
OTHER
before 18 weeks of pregnancy. In other words, their
“Allergic Contact Dermatitis.”The Skin Site.10 Apr. 1998
mothers must have taken DES within the first four to five
<http://www.skinsite.com/info_allergic.htm>.
“Dermatitis,Contact.”ThriveOnline.10 Apr. 1998 <http:// months of pregnancy. It is now known that the female
thriveonline.oxygen.com>. reproductive organs are formed during that time. DES
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1039
DES
exposure
•Fallopian tubes. Some DES daughters have fallopian
KEY TERMS tube abnormalities that lead to infertility.
•Uterus. Many DES daughters have a uterus that is
Cervix—The opening at the bottom of the uterus. abnormal in size and shape. The classic sign is the T-
Colposcopy—A special examination of the cervix shaped uterus. In the normal uterus,the cavity (hollow
using a magnifying scope. This is a procedure that space inside) is rounded. In a T-shaped uterus,the cavi-
can be done in the doctor’s office. ty is reduced to a thin T. The abnormal shape of the
inside of the uterus makes it harder for a woman to get
Fallopian tubes—The tubes that carry the ovum
pregnant and leads to a higher risk of premature labor
(egg) from the ovary to the uterus.
and birth.
Pap smear—A screening test for precancerous and
cancerous cells on the cervix. This simple test is
Diagnosis
done during a routine pelvic exam and involves
scraping cells from the cervix. Women who have been exposed to DES should have
a pelvic exam at least once a year. In addition to the usual
pelvic exam and Pap smear,DES daughters should also
have Pap smears of the vagina and, if possible, col-
appears to interfere with proper growth and development poscopy. During colposcopy, the doctor looks at the
of the uterus,cervix,vagina,and fallopian tubes. cervix and vagina through a special magnifying scope. In
this way,tiny areas of abnormal cells can be seen. This
In the early 1970s, there was an increase in a rare
procedure is easily performed in the doctor’s office.
form of cancer,clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina
and cervix. Up until that time, doctors had seen these When DES daughters get pregnant,they may be at
cancers only in elderly women. Suddenly,young women high risk for premature labor and birth and should be
who had the disease appeared. monitored very carefully.
Not all women who were exposed to DES develop
This was so unusual that researchers studied these
problems in pregnancy. However,if problems like infer-
women to see if they had anything in common. After a
tility or miscarriage do occur, the doctor may recom-
great deal of questioning and examination,it was found
mend a special x-ray test to check the woman’s fallopian
that they all had one factor in common. All of the young
tubes and uterus. This special test is called a hysterosalp-
women had been exposed to DES in utero in the early
ingogram.
weeks of pregnancy.
Today, it is difficult to imagine how shocking this
Treatment
discovery was. Doctors had only recently recognized that
medications and exposure to chemicals during pregnancy There is no treatment for the abnormalities of the
could cause birth defects. This was a birth defect that fallopian tubes and uterus caused by DES exposure. For-
had gone undetected for almost two decades. tunately,there are treatments that can help with infertility
and premature labor. Clear cell adenocarcinoma of the
Since then,doctors have studied DES daughters very
vagina or cervix must be treated with surgery and,possi-
carefully. Fortunately,the risk of clear cell adenocarcino-
bly,chemotherapy.
ma is actually quite low. In fact,it appears that if a DES
daughter has not developed this cancer by age 30, she
Resources
will not develop it. Since all DES daughters are now over
age 30,there should be no further cases related to DES BOOKS
exposure. However,there are a number of other symp- Laufer,Mark R.,and Donald P. Goldstein. “Pediatric and Ado-
toms and problems associated with DES exposure. lescent Gynecology.”In Kistner’s Gynecology,ed. Ken-
neth J. Ryan,Ross S. Berkowitz,and Robert L. Barbieri.
•Cervix and vagina. DES daughters often have distinc- St. Louis:Mosby,1995.
tive changes of the cervix and vagina that can be seen Sheets,Ellen. “Clear Cell Adenocarcinoma of the Cervix.”In
during a pelvic exam. These changes include a cervical Kistner’s Gynecology,ed. Kenneth J. Ryan,Ross S.
hood (a vaginal fold draped over the cervix), Berkowitz,and Robert L. Barbieri. St. Louis:Mosby,1995.
cockscomb cervix (an abnormally shaped cervix),and
adenosis (glandular cells normally located within the Amy B. Tuteur,MD
cervix that appear on the outside of the cervix and in
the vagina). Detached retina see Retinal detachment
1040 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
erusopxe
SED
in many illnesses. Environmental medicine is a field that
Detoxification studies exactly how those environmental factors influence
disease. Conditions such as asthma, cancer, chronic
Definition
fatigue syndrome, multiple chemical sensitivity, and
many others are strongly influenced by exposure to toxic
Detoxification is one of the more widely used treat-
or allergenic substances in the environment. The United
ments and concepts in alternative medicine. It is based on
States Centers for Disease Control estimate that over 80%
the principle that illnesses can be caused by the accumu-
of all illnesses have environmental and lifestyle causes.
lation of toxic substances (toxins) in the body. Eliminat-
ing existing toxins and avoiding new toxins are essential
Detoxification has also become a prominent treat-
parts of the healing process. Detoxification utilizes a
ment as people have become more aware of environmen-
variety of tests and techniques.
tal pollution. It is estimated that one in every four Ameri-
cans suffers from some level of heavy metal poisoning.
Purpose Heavy metals, such as lead, mercury, cadmium, and
arsenic,are by-products of industry. Synthetic agricul-
Detoxification is helpful for those patients suffering
ture chemicals,many of which are known to cause health
from many chronic diseases and conditions,including
problems,are also found in food,air,and water. Ameri-
allergies,anxiety,arthritis,asthma,chronic infections,
can agriculture uses nearly 10 lb (4.5 kg) of pesticides
depression, diabetes, headaches, heart disease, high per person on the food supply each year. These toxins
cholesterol,low blood sugar levels,digestive disorders,
have become almost unavoidable. Pesticides that are
mental illness,and obesity. It is helpful for those with
used only on crops in the southern United States have
conditions that are influenced by environmental factors,
been found in the tissue of animals in the far north of
such as cancer, as well as for those who have been
Canada. DDT,a cancer-causing insecticide that has been
exposed to high levels of toxic materials due to accident
banned for decades,is still regularly found in the fatty
or occupation. Detoxification therapy is useful for those
tissue of animals, birds, and fish, even in extremely
suffering from allergies or immune system problems
remote regions such as the North Pole.
that conventional medicine is unable to diagnose or
treat, including chronic fatigue syndrome, environ- The problem of toxins in the environment is com-
mental illness/multiple chemical sensitivity, and pounded because humans are at the top of the food chain
fibromyalgia. Symptoms for those suffering these con- and are more likely to be exposed to an accumulation of
ditions may include unexplained fatigue, increased toxic substances in the food supply. For instance,pesti-
allergies,hypersensitivity to common materials,intoler- cides and herbicides are sprayed on grains that are then
ance to certain foods and indigestion,aches and pains, fed to farm animals. Toxic substances are stored in the
low grade fever,headaches,insomnia,depression,sore fatty tissue of those animals. In addition,those animals
throats,sudden weight loss or gain,lowered resistance are often injected with synthetic hormones,antibiotics,
to infection,general malaise,and disability. Detoxifica- and other chemicals. When people eat meat products,
tion can be used as a beneficial preventative measure they are exposed to the full range of chemicals and addi-
and as a tool to increase overall health, vitality, and tives used along the entire agricultural chain. Detoxifica-
resistance to disease. tion specialists call this build up of toxins bioaccumula-
tion. They assert that the bioaccumulation of toxic sub-
stances over time is responsible for many physical and
Description
mental disorders, especially ones that are increasing
Origins rapidly (like asthma, cancer, and mental illness). As a
result,detoxification therapies are increasing in impor-
Detoxification methods of healing have been used for
tance and popularity.
thousands of years. Fasting,is one of the oldest therapeu-
tic practices in medicine. Hippocrates,the ancient Greek Toxins in the body include heavy metals and various
known as the “Father of Western medicine,”recommend- chemicals such as pesticides,pollutants,and food addi-
ed fasting as a means for improving health. Ayurvedic tives. Drugs and alcohol have toxic effects in the body.
medicine,a traditional healing system that has developed Toxins are produced as normal by-products in the
over thousands of years,utilizes detoxification methods intestines by the bacteria that break down food. The diges-
to treat many chronic conditions and to prevent illness. tion of protein also creates toxic by-products in the body.
Detoxification treatment has become one of the cor- The body has natural methods of detoxification.
nerstones of alternative medicine. Conventional medicine Individual cells get detoxified in the lymph and circula-
notes that environmental factors can play a significant role tory system. The liver is the principle organ of detoxifi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1041
Detoxification
cation,assisted by the kidneys and intestines. Toxins can mone levels can also indicate specific toxic compounds.
be excreted from the body by the kidneys,bowels,skin, A 24-hour urine analysis, where samples are taken
and lungs. Detoxification treatments become necessary around the clock,allows therapists to determine the effi-
when the body’s natural detoxification systems become ciency of the digestive tract and kidneys. Together with
overwhelmed. This can be caused by long-term effects of stool analysis,these tests may indicate toxic bowel syn-
improper diet,stress,overeating,sedentary lifestyles,ill- drome and digestive system disorders. Certain blood and
ness,and poor health habits in general. When a build up urine tests may point to nutritional deficiencies and prop-
of toxic substances in the body creates illness,it’s called er recovery diets can be designed for patients as well.
toxemia. Some people’s digestive tracts become unable
Detoxification therapists may also perform extensive
to digest food properly, due to years of overeating and
allergy and hypersensitivity tests. Intradermal (between
dietsthat are high in fat and processed foods and low in
layers of the skin) and sublingual (under the tongue)
fiber (the average American diet). When this happens,
allergy tests are used to determine a patient’s sensitivity
food cannot pass through the digestive tract efficiently.
to a variety of common substances,including formalde-
Instead of being digested properly or eliminated from the
hyde,auto exhaust,perfume,tobacco,chlorine,jet fuel,
bowel,food can literally rot inside the digestive tract and
and other chemicals.
produce toxic by-products. This state is known as toxic
Food allergies require additional tests because these
colon syndrome or intestinal toxemia.
allergies often cause reactions that are delayed for several
Detoxification therapies try to activate and assist the
days after the food is eaten. The RAST (radioallergosor-
body’s own detoxification processes. They also try to
bent test) is a blood test that determines the level of anti-
eliminate additional exposure to toxins and strengthen
bodies (immunoglobulins) in the blood after specific
the body and immune system so that toxic imbalances
foods are eaten. The cytotoxic test is a blood test that
won’t occur in the future.
determines if certain substances affect blood cells,includ-
ing foods and chemicals. The ELISA-ACT (enzyme-
Testing for toxic substances linked immunoserological assay activated cell test) is
considered to be one of the most accurate tests for aller-
Detoxification specialists use a variety of tests to
gies and hypersensitivity to foods,chemicals,and other
determine the causes contributing to toxic conditions.
agents. Other tests for food allergies are the elimination
These causes include infections, allergies, addictions,
and rotation diets,in which foods are systematically eval-
toxic chemicals, and digestive and organ dysfunction.
uated to determine the ones that are causing problems.
Blood,urine,stool,and hair analyses,as well as allergy
tests,are used to measure a variety of bodily functions Detoxification therapists usually interview and
that may indicate problems. Detoxification therapists counsel patients closely to determine and correct
usually have access to laboratories that specialize in lifestyle,occupational,psychological,and emotional fac-
sophisticated diagnostic tests for toxic conditions. tors that may also be contributing to illness.
People who have toxemia are often susceptible to
Detoxification therapies
infection because their immune systems are weakened.
Infections can be caused by parasites,bacteria,viruses, Detoxification therapists use a variety of healing
and a common yeast. Therapists will screen patients for techniques after a diagnosis is made. The first step is to
underlying infections that may be contributing to illness. eliminate a patient’s exposure to all toxic or allergenic
substances. These include heavy metals,chemicals,radi-
Liver function is studied closely with blood and
ation (from x rays, power lines, cell phones, computer
urine tests because the liver is the principle organ in the
screens,and microwaves),smog,polluted water,foods,
body responsible for removing toxic compounds. When
drugs, caffeine, alcohol, perfume, excess noise, and
the liver detoxifies a substance from the body,it does so
stress. If mercury poisoning has been determined, the
in two phases. Tests are performed that indicate where
patient will be advised to have mercury fillings from the
problems may be occurring in these phases,which may
teeth removed,preferably by a holistic dentist.
point to specific types of toxins. Blood and urine tests
can also be completed that screen for toxic chemicals Specific treatments are used to stimulate and assist
such as PCBs (environmental poisons),formaldehyde (a the body’s detoxification process. Dietary change is
common preservative), pesticides, and heavy metals. immediately enacted,eliminating allergic and unhealthy
Another useful blood test is a test for zinc deficiency, foods,and emphasizing foods that assist detoxification
which may reveal heavy metal poisoning. Hair analysis and support healing. Detoxification diets are generally
is used to test for heavy metal levels in the body. Blood low in fat,high in fiber,and vegetarian with a raw food
and urine tests check immune system activity,and hor- emphasis. Processed foods, alcohol, and caffeine are
1042 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitacifixoteD
avoided. Nutritional supplements such as vitamins,min- elimination. Homeopathic remedies have also been
erals,antioxidants,amino acids,and essential fatty acids shown to be effective for removing heavy metals.
are often prescribed. Spirulina is a sea algae that is fre-
Sweating therapies can also detoxify the body
quently given to assist in eliminating heavy metals.
because the skin is a major organ of elimination. Sweating
Lipotropic agents are certain vitamins and nutrients that
helps release those toxins that are stored in the subcuta-
promote the flow of bile and fat from the liver.
neous (under the skin) fat cells. Saunas,therapeutic baths,
Many herbal supplements are used in detoxification and exerciseare some of these treatments. Body therapies
therapies as well. Milk thistle extract,called silymarin,is may also be prescribed,including massage therapy,acu-
one of the more potent herbs for detoxifying the liver. pressure,shiatsu,manual lymph drainage,and polarity
Naturopathy,Ayurvedic medicine,and traditional Chi- therapy. These body therapies seek to improve circulatory
nese medicine(TCM) recommend numerous herbal for- and structural problems,reduce stress,and promote heal-
mulas for detoxification and immune strengthening. If ing responses in the body. Mind/body therapies such as
infections or parasites have been found,these are treated psychotherapy,counseling,and stress management tech-
with herbal formulas and,in difficult cases,antibiotics. niques may be used to heal the psychological components
of illness and to help patients overcome their negative pat-
For toxic bowel syndrome and digestive tract disor- terns contributing to illness.
ders,herbal laxativesand high fiber foods such as psylli-
um seeds may be given to cleanse the digestive tract and
Practitioners and treatment costs
promote elimination. Colonics are used to cleanse the
lower intestines. Digestive enzymes are prescribed to The costs of detoxification therapies can vary wide-
improve digestion, and acidophilus and other friendly ly, depending on the number of tests and treatments
bacteria are reintroduced into the system with nutritional required. Detoxification treatments can be lengthy and
supplements. involved since illnesses associated with toxic conditions
usually develop over many years and may not clear up
Fasting is another major therapy in detoxification. quickly. Detoxification treatments may be lengthy
Fasting is one of the quickest ways to promote the elimina- because they often strive for the holistic healing of the
tion of stored toxins in the body and to prompt the healing body,mind,and emotions.
process. People with severe toxic conditions are supervised
Practitioners may be conventionally trained medical
closely during fasting because the number of toxins in the
doctors with specialties in environmental medicine or
body temporarily increases as they are being released.
interests in alternative treatment. The majority of detoxi-
Chelation therapyis used by detoxification special- fication therapists are alternative practitioners,such as
ists to rid the body of heavy metals. Chelates are particu- naturopaths,homeopaths,ayurvedic doctors,or tradition-
lar substances that bind to heavy metals and speed their al Chinese doctors. Insurance coverage varies,depending
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1043
Detoxification
Common Herbs Used For Detoxification
Antibiotics Anticatarrhals (Help Eliminate Mucus) Blood Cleaners
Clove Boneset Burdock root
Echinacea Echinacea Dandelion root
Eucalyptus Garlic Echinacea
Garlic Goldenseal root Oregon grape root
Myrrh Hyssop Red clover blossoms
Prickly ash bark Sage Yellow dock root
Propolis Yarrow
Wormwood
Diaphoretics/Skin Cleaners Diuretics Laxatives
Boneset Cleavers Buckthorn
Burdock root Corn silk Cascara sagrada
Cayenne pepper Horsetail Dandelion root
Elder flowers Juniper berries Licorice root
Ginger root Parsley leaf Rhubarb root
Goldenseal root Uva ursi Senna leaf
Peppermint Yarrow dock Yellow dock
Oregon grape root
Yellow dock
treatment is scarcely mentioned by the medical establish-
KEY TERMS ment. The research that exists on detoxification is largely
testimonial,consisting of individual personal accounts of
Allergen—A foreign substance, such as mites in healing without statistics or controlled scientific experi-
house dust or animal dander, that when ments. In the alternative medical community,detoxifica-
inhaled,causes the airways to narrow and pro- tion is an essential and widely accepted treatment for
duces symptoms of asthma. many illnesses and chronic conditions.
Antibody—A protein, also called immunoglobu-
Resources
lin, produced by immune system cells to remove
antigens (the foreign substances that trigger the BOOKS
immune response). Goldberg,Burton. Chronic Fatigue,Fibromyalgia and Envi-
ronmental Illness.Tiburon,CA:Future Medicine,1998.
Fibromyalgia—A condition of debilitating pain,
Lappe,Marc. Chemical Deception:The Toxic Threat to Health
among other symptoms, in the muscles and the
and the Environment.San Francisco:Sierra Club,1991.
myofascia (the thin connective tissue that sur-
Lawson,Lynn. Staying Well in a Toxic World.Chicago:Noble,
rounds muscles, bones, and organs).
1993.
Hypersensitivity—The state where even a tiny Randolph,Theron G.,M.D. Environmental Medicine:Begin-
amount of allergen can cause severe allergic reac- nings and Bibliographies of Clinical Ecology.Fort
Collins,CO:Clinical Ecology Publications,1987.
tions.
Multiple chemical sensitivity—A condition char- PERIODICALS
acterized by severe and crippling allergic reac- Alternative Therapies Magazine.P.O. Box 17969,Durham,NC
27715. (919) 668-8825. <http://www.alternative-thera
tions to commonly used substances, particularly
pies.com>.
chemicals. Also called environmental illness.
Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine.1114 N.
Arlington Heights Rd.,Arlington Heights,IL 60004.
(847) 818-1800.
ORGANIZATIONS
on the practitioner and the treatment involved. Con-
American Holistic Medical Association. 4101 Lake Boone
sumers should review their individual insurance policies
Trail,Suite 201,Raleigh,NC 27607.
regarding treatment coverage.
Cancer Prevention Coalition. 2121 West Taylor St.,Chicago,
IL 60612. (312) 996-2297. <http:\\www.preventcancer.
Preparations com>.
Center for Occupational and Environmental Medicine.7510
Patients can assist diagnosis and treatment by keep-
Northforest Dr.,North Charleston,SC 29420. (843) 572-
ing detailed diaries of their activities, symptoms, and 1600. <http:\\www.coem.com>.
contact with environmental factors that may be affecting Northeast Center for Environmental Medicine. P.O. Box 2716,
their health. Reducing exposure to environmental toxins Syracuse,NY 13220. (800) 846-ONUS.
and making immediate dietary and lifestyle changes may Northwest Center for Environmental Medicine. 177 NE 102nd
speed the detoxification process. St.,Portland,OR 97220. (503) 561-0966.
OTHER
Side effects A Citizens Toxic Waste Manual.Greenpeace USA,1436 U St.
NW,Washington,DC 20009. (202) 462-1177.
During the detoxification process,patients may expe-
rience side effects of fatigue,malaise,aches and pains,
Douglas Dupler
emotional duress,acne,headaches,allergies,and symp-
toms of colds and flu. Detoxification specialists claim that
these negative side effects are part of the healing process.
These reactions are sometimes called healing crises,
which are caused by temporarily increased levels of tox-
Deviated septum
ins in the body due to elimination and cleansing.
Definition
Research and general acceptance
The nasal septum is a thin structure,separating the
Although environmental medicine is gaining more two sides of the nose. If it is not in the middle of the
respect within conventional medicine, detoxification nose,then it is deviated.
1044 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
mutpes
detaiveD
Description
The nasal septum is composed of two parts. Toward
the back of the head the nasal septum is rigid bone,but
further forward the bone becomes cartilage. With one
finger in each nostril this cartilage can easily be bent
back and forth. If the nasal septum is sufficiently dis-
placed to one side, it will impede the flow of air and
mucus through the nose. This condition,called a deviat-
ed septum,can cause symptoms and disease.
Causes and symptoms
A deviated septum can be a simple variation in nor-
mal structure or the result of a broken nose. Any narrow-
ing of the nasal passageway that it causes will threaten
the drainage of secretions from the sinuses,which must
pass through the nose. It is a general rule of medicine
that when flow is obstructed,whether it is mucus from
the sinuses or bile from the gall bladder,infection results.
People with allergic rhinitis (hay fever) are at greater
risk of obstruction because their nasal passageways are
already narrowed by the swollen membranes lining them.
The result is sinusitis,which can be acute and severe or
chronic and lingering.
Diagnosis
It is easy to see that a septum is deviated. It is more
difficult to determine if that deviation needs correction. It
is common for a patient to complain that he/she can
breathe through only one nostril. Then the diagnosis is
easy. A deviated septum may also contribute to snoring,
sleep apnea,and other breathing disorders.
Then,the process is repeated in reverse. These therapies
Treatment are all useful to take care of symptoms,but do not correct
the problem. Nasospecific,a procedure where a deflated
The definitive treatment is surgical repositioning of
balloon is inserted in the nostril and inflated to a large
the septum,accomplished by breaking it loose and fixing
enough degree to adjust the septal deviation, can be an
it in a proper place while it heals. Decongestants like
alternative to surgery. A trained practitioner in the
pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine will shrink the
nasospecific procedure is necessary.
membranes and thereby enlarge the passages. Antihista-
mines, nasal cortisone spray, and other allergy treat-
ments may also be temporarily beneficial.
Prognosis
Surgical repair is curative and carries little risk.
Alternative treatment
Chronic infection can be painful and lead to complica-
As a palliative,saline drops and sprays are very help- tions until it is resolved. If there is continued obstruction,
ful in loosening mucus in the obstructed side and prevent- the infection will very likely return.
ing drying in the other side,where all the air blows. Hot
peppers,such as jalapenos,can produce enough tears and
Prevention
discharge to flush out a stopped-up nose. An even more
effective treatment is called a nasal lavage, often done Avoidance of virus colds,airborne dusts,air pollu-
using a small pot with a spout. Saline solution is poured tion, and known allergens will minimize the irritation
into one nostril and allowed to flow out the other nostril. and swelling of the membranes lining the nasal passages.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1045
Deviated
septum
A close-up of person with a deviated septum.(Custom Med-
ical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
released. ADH influences the amount of fluid that the
KEY TERMS kidneys reabsorb into the circulatory system and the
amount of fluid that the kidneys pass out of the body in
Allergen—Any substance that irritates people sen- the form of urine.
sitive (allergic) to it. Production of ADH is regulated by the osmolality of
Allergic rhinitis—Swelling and inflammation of the circulating blood. Osmolality refers to the concentra-
the nasal membranes caused by sensitivity to air- tion of dissolved chemicals (such as sodium,potassium,
borne matter like pollen or cat hair. and chloride; together called solute) circulating in the
fluid base of the blood (plasma). When there is very little
Saline—A salt solution in water. Normal saline has
fluid compared to the concentration of solute,the pitu-
the same salt concentration as the body, 0.9%.
itary will increase ADH production. This tells the kid-
Sinuses—The nasal sinuses, air-filled cavities sur- neys to retain more water and to decrease the amount of
rounding the eyes and nose, like the nose itself are urine produced. As fluid is retained,the concentration of
lined with mucus-producing membranes. They solute will normalize. At other times,when the fluid con-
provide cleansing to the nose, resonance to the tent of the blood is high in comparison to the concentra-
voice, and structure to the face. tion of solute,ADH production will decrease. The kid-
Sinusitis—Infection of the sinuses. neys are then free to pass an increased amount of fluid
out of the body in the urine. Again, this will allow the
Sleep apnea—A condition in which breathing is
plasma osmolality to return to normal.
temporarily interrupted during sleep. It leads to
high blood pressure, sleepiness, and a variety of Diabetes insipidus occurs when either the amount of
other problems. ADH produced by the pituitary is below normal (central
DI),or the kidneys’ability to respond to ADH is defective
(nephrogenic DI). In either case, a person with DI will
pass extraordinarily large quantities of urine,sometimes
Resources reaching 10 or more liters each day. At the same time,the
patient’s blood will be very highly concentrated,with low
BOOKS
fluid volume and high concentrations of solute.
Ballenger,John Jacob. Disorders of the Nose,Throat,Ear,
Head,and Neck.Philadelphia:Lea & Febiger,1991. DI occurs on average when a person is about 24
years old,and occurs more frequently in males than in
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD females.
Dextromethorphan see Cough suppressants
Causes and symptoms
DI may run in families. The cause of this type of DI
is unknown. Other times,central DI can be caused by:
•an injury to the head
Diabetes insipidus •brain surgery
•cancers that have spread to the pituitary gland (most
Definition
commonly occurring with breast cancer)
Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a disorder that causes the
•sarcoidosis (or other related disorders), causing
patient to produce tremendous quantities of urine. The
destruction of the pituitary gland
massively increased urine output is usually accompanied
by intense thirst. •any condition or illness that causes decreased oxygen
delivery to the brain
Description •the use of certain medications that decrease ADH produc-
tion (like the antiseizure drug phenytoin)
The balance of fluid within the body is maintained
•the excessive use of alcohol
through a number of mechanisms. One important chemi-
cal involved in fluid balance is called antidiuretic hor- Central DI may also occur in women who are preg-
mone (ADH). ADH is produced by the pituitary,a small nant or have just given birth,and in patients with AIDS
gland located at the base of the brain. In a healthy person who have suffered certain types of brain infections.
and under normal conditions, ADH is continuously Nephrogenic DI sometimes occurs in patients who are
1046 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sudipisni
setebaiD
taking the medication lithium, patients who have high
levels of blood calcium,and patients who are pregnant. KEY TERMS
DI is easily confused with an entirely unrelated dis-
order, psychogenic polydipsia. Polydipsia refers to Concentration—Refers to the amount of solute pre-
drinking large amounts of water. Psychogenic polydipsia sent in a solution, compared to the total amount of
is a psychiatric problem that makes a person drink huge solvent.
quantities of water uncontrollably. Dilute—A solution that has comparatively more
Symptoms of DI include extreme thirst and the pro- fluid in it, relative to the quantity of solute.
duction of tremendous quantities of urine. Patients with Osmolality—A measure of the solute-to-solvent
DI typically drink huge amounts of water, and usually concentration of a solution.
report a specific craving for cold water. When the amount
Solute—Solid substances that are dissolved in liq-
of water passed in the urine exceeds the patient’s ability
uid in order to make a solution.
to drink ample replacement water,the patient may begin
to suffer from symptoms of dehydration. These symp-
toms include weakness,fatigue,fever,low blood pres-
sure, increased heart rate, dizziness, and confusion. If
left untreated,the patient could lapse into unconscious-
special dietsthat restrict the amount of solute taken in.
These patients are also treated with a type of medication
ness and die.
called a thiazide diuretic.
Diagnosis
Prognosis
Diagnosis should be suspected in any patient with
sudden increased thirst and urination. Laboratory exami- Uncomplicated diabetes insipidus is controllable
nation of urine will reveal very dilute urine, made up with adequate intake of water and most patients can lead
mostly of water with no solute. Examination of the blood normal lives.
will reveal very concentrated blood,high in solute and
low in fluid volume. Resources
A water deprivation test may be performed. This test BOOKS
requires a patient to stop all fluid intake. The patient is Fishman,Mark C.,et al. Medicine.Philadelphia:J. B. Lippin-
weighed just before the test begins,and urine is collected cott Co.,1996.
and examined hourly. The test is stopped when: Moses,Arnold M.,and David H. P. Streeten. “Deficiency of
Vasopressin:Diabetes Insipidus.”In Harrison’s Principles
•the patient has lost more than 5% of his or her original
of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New
body weight
York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
•the patient has reached certain limits of low blood pres-
PERIODICALS
sure and increased heart rate
Adam,Patricia. “Evaluation and Management of Diabetes
•the urine is no longer changing significantly from one Insipidus.”American Family Physician55,no. 6 (1 May
sample to the next in terms of solute concentration 1997):2146+.
Singer,Irwin,et al. “The Management of Diabetes Insipidus in
The next step of the test involves injecting a synthet-
Adults.”Archives of Internal Medicine157,no. 12 (23
ic form of ADH,with one last urine sample examined 60
June 1997):1293+.
minutes later. Comparing plasma and urine osmolality
allows the doctor to diagnose either central DI,nephro-
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
genic DI,partial DI,or psychogenic polydipsia.
Treatment
A number of medications can be given to decrease
Diabetes mellitus
the quantity of fluid passed out into the urine. These
include vasopressin (Pitressin) injected and desmo-
Definition
pressin acetate (DDAVP) inhaled through the nose. Other
medications that may be given include some antidiuretic Diabetes mellitus is a condition in which the pan-
drugs (chlorpropamide, clofibrate, carbamazepine). creas no longer produces enough insulin or when cells
Patients with nephrogenic DI,however,will also require stop responding to the insulin that is produced,so that
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1047
Diabetes
mellitus
glucose in the blood cannot be absorbed into the cells of Types of diabetes mellitus
the body. Symptoms include frequent urination,lethargy,
Type I diabetes,sometimes called juvenile diabetes,
excessive thirst, and hunger. The treatment includes
begins most commonly in childhood or adolescence. In
changes in diet, oral medications, and in some cases, this form of diabetes, the body produces little or no
daily injections of insulin.
insulin. It is characterized by a sudden onset and occurs
more frequently in populations descended from Northern
Description European countries (Finland,Scotland,Scandinavia) than
in those from Southern European countries,the Middle
Diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease that causes
East,or Asia. In the United States,approximately three
serious health complications including renal (kidney)
people in 1,000 develop Type I diabetes. This form is also
failure, heart disease, stroke, and blindness. Approxi-
called insulin-dependent diabetes because people who
mately 14 million Americans (about 5% of the popula-
develop this type need to have daily injections of insulin.
tion) have diabetes. Unfortunately,as many as one-half
are unaware that they have it. Brittle diabetics are a subgroup of Type I where
patients have frequent and rapid swings of blood sugar
Background levels between hyperglycemia (a condition where there is
too much glucose or sugar in the blood) and hypo-
Every cell in the human body needs energy in order
glycemia(a condition where there is abnormally low lev-
to function. The body’s primary energy source is glu-
els of glucose or sugar in the blood). These patients may
cose, a simple sugar resulting from the digestion of
require several injections of different types of insulin
foods containing carbohydrates (sugars and starches).
during the day to keep the blood sugar level within a fair-
Glucose from the digested food circulates in the blood
ly normal range.
as a ready energy source for any cells that need it.
Insulin is a hormone or chemical produced by cells in The more common form of diabetes,Type II,occurs
the pancreas, an organ located behind the stomach. in approximately 3–5% of Americans under 50 years of
Insulin bonds to a receptor site on the outside of cell and age, and increases to 10–15% in those over 50. More
acts like a key to open a doorway into the cell through than 90% of the diabetics in the United States are Type II
which glucose can enter. Some of the glucose can be diabetics. Sometimes called age-onset or adult-onset dia-
converted to concentrated energy sources like glycogen betes,this form of diabetes occurs most often in people
or fatty acids and saved for later use. When there is not who are overweight and who do not exercise. It is also
enough insulin produced or when the doorway no longer more common in people of Native American,Hispanic,
recognizes the insulin key, glucose stays in the blood and African-American descent. People who have migrat-
rather entering the cells. ed to Western cultures from East India,Japan,and Aus-
tralian Aboriginal cultures are also more likely to devel-
The body will attempt to dilute the high level of
op Type II diabetes than those who remain in their origi-
glucose in the blood,a condition called hyperglycemia,
nal countries.
by drawing water out of the cells and into the blood-
stream in an effort to dilute the sugar and excrete it in Type II is considered a milder form of diabetes
the urine. It is not unusual for people with undiagnosed because of its slow onset (sometimes developing over the
diabetes to be constantly thirsty,drink large quantities of course of several years) and because it can usually be
water,and urinate frequently as their bodies try to get rid controlled with diet and oral medication. The conse-
of the extra glucose. This creates high levels of glucose quences of uncontrolled and untreated Type II diabetes,
in the urine. however,are the just as serious as those for Type I. This
form is also called noninsulin-dependent diabetes,a term
At the same time that the body is trying to get rid
that is somewhat misleading. Many people with Type II
of glucose from the blood,the cells are starving for glu-
diabetes can control the condition with diet and oral
cose and sending signals to the body to eat more food,
medications,however,insulin injections are sometimes
thus making patients extremely hungry. To provide
necessary if treatment with diet and oral medication is
energy for the starving cells,the body also tries to con-
not working.
vert fats and proteins to glucose. The breakdown of fats
and proteins for energy causes acid compounds called Another form of diabetes called gestational dia-
ketones to form in the blood. Ketones will also be betes can develop during pregnancy and generally
excreted in the urine. As ketones build up in the blood, resolves after the baby is delivered. This diabetic condi-
a condition called ketoacidosis can occur. This condi- tion develops during the second or third trimester of
tion can be life threatening if left untreated,leading to pregnancy in about 2% of pregnancies. The condition is
comaand death. usually treated by diet,however,insulin injections may
1048 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sutillem
setebaiD
be required. These women who have diabetes during
pregnancy are at higher risk for developing Type II dia-
betes within 5–10 years.
Diabetes can also develop as a result of pancreatic
disease,alcoholism,malnutrition,or other severe ill-
nesses that stressthe body.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
The causes of diabetes mellitus are unclear,howev-
er, there seem to be both hereditary (genetic factors
passed on in families) and environmental factors
involved. Research has shown that some people who
develop diabetes have common genetic markers. In Type
I diabetes,the immune system,the body’s defense sys-
tem against infection, is believed to be triggered by a
virus or another microorganism to destroy the cells in the
pancreas that produce insulin. In Type II diabetes,age,
obesity,and family history of diabetes play a roll. blood pressure (furosemide, clonidine, and thiazide
diuretics),drugs with hormonal activity (oral contra-
In Type II diabetes, the pancreas may produce
ceptives,thyroid hormone,progestins,and glucocorti-
enough insulin,however,cells have become resistant to
corids), and the anti-inflammation drug indomethacin.
the insulin produced and it may not work as effectively.
Several drugs that are used to treat mood disorders
Symptoms of Type II diabetes can begin so gradually that
(such as anxietyand depression) can also impair glucose
a person may not know that they have it. Early signs are
absorption. These drugs include haloperidol,lithium car-
lethargy extreme thirst, and frequent urination. Other
bonate, phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants, and
symptoms may include sudden weight loss,slow wound
adrenergic agonists. Other medications that can cause
healing,urinary tract infections,gum disease,or blurred
diabetes symptoms include isoniazid, nicotinic acid,
vision. It is not unusual for Type II diabetes to be detect-
cimetidine,and heparin.
ed while a patient is seeing a doctor about another health
concern that is actually being caused by the yet undiag-
nosed diabetes. Symptoms
Individuals who are at high risk of developing Type Symptoms of diabetes can develop suddenly (over
II diabetes mellitus include people who: days or weeks) in previously healthy children or adoles-
cents, or can develop gradually (over several years) in
•are obese (more than 20% above their ideal body
overweight adults over the age of 40. The classic symp-
weight)
toms include feeling tired and sick,frequent urination,
•have a relative with diabetes mellitus
excessive thirst,excessive hunger,and weight loss.
•belong to a high-risk ethnic population (African-Amer-
Ketoacidosis, a condition due to starvation or
ican,Native American,Hispanic,or Native Hawaiian)
uncontrolled diabetes, is common in Type I diabetes.
•have been diagnosed with gestational diabetes or have Ketones are acid compounds that form in the blood when
delivered a baby weighing more than 9 lbs (4 kg) the body breaks down fats and proteins. Symptoms
include abdominal pain, vomiting, rapid breathing,
•have high blood pressure (140/90 mmHg or above)
extreme lethargy and drowsiness. Patients with ketoaci-
•have a high density lipoprotein cholesterol level less
dosis will also have a sweet breath odor. Left untreated,
than or equal to 35 mg/dL and/or a triglyceride level
this condition can lead to coma and death.
greater than or equal to 250 mg/dL
With Type II diabetes,the condition may not become
•have had impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fast-
evident until the patient presents for medical treatment for
ingglucose on previous testing
some other condition. A patient may have heart disease,
Several common medications can impair the body’s chronic infections of the gums and urinary tract,blurred
use of insulin,causing a condition known as secondary vision, numbness in the feet and legs, or slow-healing
diabetes. These medications include treatments for high wounds. Women may experience genital itching.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1049
Diabetes
mellitus
Wrinkled,dehydrated skin of a person in a diabetic coma.
Untreated diabetes mellitus results in elevated blood glu-
cose levels,causing a variety of symptoms that can culmi-
nate in a diabetic coma.(Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced
by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Cataracts—A condition where the lens of the eye Insulin—A hormone or chemical produced by the
becomes cloudy. pancreas, insulin is needed by cells of the body in
order to use glucose (sugar), the body’s main source
Diabetic peripheral neuropathy—A condition where
of energy.
the sensitivity of nerves to pain, temperature, and
pressure is dulled particularly in the legs and feet. Ketoacidosis—A condition due to starvation or
uncontrolled Type I diabetes. Ketones are acid com-
Diabetic retinopathy—A condition where the tiny
pounds that form in the blood when the body
blood vessels to the retina, the tissues that sense
breaks down fats and proteins. Symptoms include
light at the back of the eye, are damaged, leading to
abdominal pain, vomiting, rapid breathing, extreme
blurred vision, sudden blindness, or black spots,
tiredness, and drowsiness.
lines, or flashing light in the field of vision.
Kidney dialysis—A process where blood is filtered
Glaucoma—A condition where pressure within the
through a dialysis machine to remove waste prod-
eye causes damage to the optic nerve, which sends
ucts that would normally be removed by the kid-
visual images to the brain.
neys. The filtered blood is then circulated back into
Hyperglycemia—A condition where there is too
the patient. This process is also called renal dialysis.
much glucose or sugar in the blood.
Pancreas—A gland located behind the stomach that
Hypoglycemia—A condition where there is too lit-
produces insulin.
tle glucose or sugar in the blood.
Diagnosis indicate problems with kidney function and can be used
to track the development of renal failure. A more sensitive
Diabetes is suspected based on symptoms. Urine and
test for urine protein uses radioactively tagged chemicals
blood tests can be used to confirm a diagnose of diabetes
to detect microalbuminuria,small amounts of protein in
based on the amount of glucose. Urine tests can also
the urine,that may not show up on dipstick tests.
detect ketones and protein in the urine that may help
diagnose diabetes and assess how well the kidneys are
Blood tests
functioning. These tests can also be used to monitor the
disease once the patient is on a standardized diet, oral FASTING GLUCOSE TEST. Blood is drawn from a vein
medications,or insulin. in the patient’s arm after a period at least eight hours when
the patient has not eaten,usually in the morning before
breakfast. The red blood cells are separated from the sam-
Urine tests
ple and the amount of glucose is measured in the remain-
Clinistix and Diastix are paper strips or dipsticks ing plasma. A plasma level of 7.8 mmol/L (200 mg/L) or
that change color when dipped in urine. The test strip is greater can indicate diabetes. The fasting glucose test is
compared to a chart which shows the amount of glucose usually repeated on another day to confirm the results.
in the urine based on the change in color. The level of
POSTPRANDIAL GLUCOSE TEST. Blood is taken right
glucose in the urine lags behind the level of glucose in
after the patient has eaten a meal.
the blood. Testing the urine with a test stick,paper strip,
or tablet that changes color when sugar is present is not ORAL GLUCOSE TOLERANCE TEST. Blood samples are
as accurate as blood testing, however it can give a fast taken from a vein before and after a patient drinks a thick,
and simple reading. sweet syrup of glucose and other sugars. In a non-diabet-
ic,the level of glucose in the blood goes up immediately
Ketones in the urine can be detected using similar
after the drink and then decreases gradually as insulin is
types of dipstick tests (Acetest or Ketostix). Ketoacidosis
used by the body to metabolize,or absorb,the sugar. In a
can be a life-threatening situation in Type I diabetics,so
diabetic,the glucose in the blood goes up and stays high
having a quick and simple test to detect ketones can
after drinking the sweetened liquid. A plasma glucose
assist in establishing a diagnosis sooner.
level of 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) or higher at two hours
Another dipstick test can determine the presence of after drinking the syrup and at one other point during the
protein or albumin in the urine. Protein in the urine can two-hour test period confirms the diagnosis of diabetes.
1050 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sutillem
setebaiD
A diagnosis of diabetes is confirmed if there are exchange system, along with a plan of moderate exer-
symptoms of diabetes and a plasma glucose level of at cise,can help them lose excess weight and improve their
least 11.1 mmol/L,a fasting plasma glucose level of at overall health.
least 7 mmol/L; or a two-hour plasma glucose level of at
least 11.1 mmol/L during an oral glucose tolerance test. Oral medications
Home blood glucose monitoring kits are available so Oral medications are available to lower blood glucose
patients with diabetes can monitor their own levels. A in Type II diabetics. The drugs first prescribed for Type II
small needle or lancet is used to prick the finger and a diabetes are in a class of compounds called sulfonylureas
drop of blood is collected and analyzed by a monitoring and include tolbutamide,tolazamide,acetohexamide,and
device. Some patients may test their blood glucose levels chlorpropamide. Newer drugs in the same class are now
several times during a day and use this information to available and include glyburide, glimeperide, and glip-
adjust their doses of insulin. izide. The way that these drugs work is not well under-
stood,however,they seem to stimulate cells of the pan-
creas to produce more insulin. New medications that are
Treatment
available to treat diabetes include metformin, acarbose,
There is currently no cure for diabetes; the condi- and troglitizone. The choice of the right medication
tion,however,can be managed so that patients can live a depends in part on the individual patient profile. All drugs
relatively normal life. Treatment of diabetes focuses on have side effects that may make them inappropriate for
two goals:keeping blood glucose within normal range particular patients. Some for example, may stimulate
and preventing the development of long-term complica- weight gain or cause stomach irritation,so they may not be
tions. Careful monitoring of diet, exercise, and blood the best treatment for someone who is already overweight
glucose levels are as important as the use of insulin or or who also has stomach ulcers. While these medications
oral medications in preventing complications of diabetes. are an important aspect of treatment for Type II diabetes,
they are not a substitute for a well planned diet and moder-
ate exercise. Oral medications are not effective for Type I
Dietary changes
diabetes,in which the patient produces little or no insulin.
Diet and moderate exercise are the first treatments
implemented in diabetes. For many Type II diabetics, Insulin
weight loss may be an important goal in helping them to
Patients with Type I diabetes need daily injections of
control their diabetes. A well-balanced,nutritious diet pro-
insulin to help their bodies use glucose. The amount and
vides approximately 50–60% of calories from carbohy-
type of insulin required depends on the height,weight,
drates,approximately 10–20% of calories from protein,
age,food intake,and activity level of the individual dia-
and less than 30% of calories from fat. The number of
betic patient. Some patients with Type II diabetes may
calories required by an individual depends on their age,
need to use insulin injections if their diabetes cannot be
weight,and activity level. The calorie intake also needs to
controlled with diet,exercise,and oral medication. Injec-
be distributed over the course of the entire day so surges of
tions are given subcutaneously, that is, just under the
glucose entering the blood system are kept to a minimum.
skin,using a small needle and syringe. Injection sites can
Keeping track of the number of calories provided by be anywhere on the body where there is looser skin,
different foods can become complicated,so patients are including the upper arm,abdomen,or upper thigh.
usually advised to consult a nutritionist or dietitian. An
Purified human insulin is most commonly used,
individualized,easy to manage diet plan can be set up for
however, insulin from beef and pork sources are also
each patient. Both the American Diabetes Association and
available. Insulin may be given as an injection of a single
the American Dietetic Association recommend dietsbased
dose of one type of insulin once a day. Different types of
on the use of food exchange lists. Each food exchange
insulin can be mixed and given in one dose or split into
contains a known amount of calories in the form of pro-
two or more doses during a day. Patients who require
tein,fat,or carbohydrate. A patient’s diet plan will consist
multiple injections over the course of a day may be able
of a certain number of exchanges from each food category
to use an insulin pump that administers small doses of
(meat or protein,fruits,breads and starches,vegetables,
insulin on demand. The small battery-operated pump is
and fats) to be eaten at meal times and as snacks. Patients
worn outside the body and is connected to a needle that is
have flexibility in choosing which foods they eat as long
inserted into the abdomen. Pumps can be programmed to
as they stick with the number of exchanges prescribed.
inject small doses of insulin at various times during the
For many Type II diabetics,weight loss is an impor- day,or the patient may be able to adjust the insulin doses
tant factor in controlling their condition. The food to coincide with meals and exercise.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1051
Diabetes
mellitus
Regular insulin is fast-acting and starts to work within •cayenne pepper (Capsicum frutescens) can help relieve
15–30 minutes, with its peak glucose-lowering effect pain in the peripheral nerves (a type of diabetic neu-
about two hours after it is injected. Its effects last for about ropathy)
four to six hours. NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn) and •ginkgo (Gingko biloba) may maintain blood flow to the
Lente insulin are intermediate-acting, starting to work
retina,helping to prevent diabetic retinopathy
within one to three hours and lasting up to 18–26 hours.
Ultra-lente is a long-acting form of insulin that starts to Any therapy that lowers stress levels can also be use-
work within four to eight hours and lasts 28–36 hours. ful in treating diabetes by helping to reduce insulin
requirements. Among the alternative treatments that aim
Hypoglycemia,or low blood sugar,can be caused by
to lower stress are hypnotherapy, biofeedback, and
too much insulin, too little food (or eating too late to
meditation.
coincide with the action of the insulin), alcohol con-
sumption, or increased exercise. A patient with symp-
toms of hypoglycemia may be hungry,cranky,confused, Prognosis
and tired. The patient may become sweaty and shaky.
Uncontrolled diabetes is a leading cause of blind-
Left untreated,the patient can lose consciousness or have
ness,end-stage renal disease,and limb amputations. It
a seizure. This condition is sometimes called an insulin
also doubles the risks of heart disease and increases the
reaction and should be treated by giving the patient
risk of stroke. Eye problems including cataracts,glau-
something sweet to eat or drink like a candy,sugar cubes,
coma,and diabetic retinopathy are also more common in
juice,or another high sugar snack.
diabetics.
Surgery Diabetic peripheral neuropathy is a condition
where nerve endings,particularly in the legs and feet
Transplantation of a healthy pancreas into a diabetic
become less sensitive. Diabetic foot ulcers are a partic-
patient is a successful treatment,however,this transplant
ular problem since the patient does not feel the pain of
is usually done only if a kidney transplant is performed at
a blister,callous,or other minor injury. Poor blood cir-
the same time. Although a pancreas transplant is possi-
culation in the legs and feet contribute to delayed
ble,it is not clear if the potential benefits outweigh the
wound healing. The inability to sense pain along with
risks of the surgery and drug therapy needed.
the complications of delayed wound healing can result
in minor injuries, blisters, or callouses becoming
Alternative treatment infected and difficult to treat. In cases of severe infec-
tion,the infected tissue begins to break down and rot
Since diabetes can be life-threatening if not properly
away. The most serious consequence of this condition
managed,patients should not attempt to treat this condi-
is the need for amputationof toes,feet,or legs due to
tion without medicial supervision. A variety of alterna-
severe infection.
tive therapies can be helpful in managing the symptoms
of diabetes and supporting patients with the disease. Heart disease and kidney disease are common com-
Acupuncturecan help relieve the pain associated with plications of diabetes. Long-term complications may
diabetic neuropathyby stimulation of cetain points. A include the need for kidney dialysisor a kidney trans-
qualified practitioner should be consulted. Herbal reme- plant due to kidney failure.
dies may also be helpful in managing diabetes. Although
Babies born to diabetic mothers have an increased
there is no herbal substitute for insulin,some herbs may
risk of birth defectsand distress at birth.
help adjust blood sugar levels or manage other diabetic
symptoms. Some options include:
Prevention
•fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum) has been
shown in some studies to reduce blood insulin and glu- Research continues on ways to prevent diabetes and
cose levels while also lowering cholesterol to detect those at risk for developing diabetes. While the
onset of Type I diabetes is unpredictable, the risk of
•bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus) may lower blood glu-
developing Type II diabetes can be reduced by maintain-
cose levels, as well as helping to maintain healthy
ing ideal weight and exercising regularly. The physical
blood vessels
and emotional stress of surgery,illness,pregnancy,and
•garlic (Allium sativum) may lower blood sugar and cho-
alcoholism can increase the risks of diabetes,so main-
lesterol levels
taining a healthy lifestyle is critical to preventing the
•onions (Allium cepa) may help lower blood glucose onset of Type II diabetes and preventing further compli-
levels by freeing insulin to metabolize it cations of the disease.
1052 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sutillem
setebaiD
Resources
Diabetic foot infections
BOOKS
“Diabetes Mellitus.”In Professional Guide to Diseases.5th ed. Definition
Springhouse,PA:Springhouse Corporation,1995.
Foster,Daniel W. “Diabetes Mellitus.”In Harrison’s Principles Diabetic foot infections are infections that can
of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New develop in the skin, muscles, or bones of the foot as a
York:McGraw-Hill,1997. result of the nerve damage and poor circulation that is
Garber,Alan J. “Diabetes Mellitus.”In Internal Medicine,ed. associated with diabetes.
Jay H. Stein,et al. St. Louis:Mosby,1998.
Karam,John H. “Diabetes Mellitus & Hypoglycemia.”In Cur-
rent Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1998.37th ed. Ed. Description
Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,
People who have diabetes have a greater-than-average
1997.
chance of developing foot infections. Because a person
Sherwin,Robert S. “Diabetes Mellitus.”In Cecil Textbook of
who has diabetes may not feel foot pain or discomfort,
Medicine,ed. J. Claude Bennett and Fred Plum. Philadel-
phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
problems can remain undetected until fever,weakness,or
Smit,Charles Kent,John P. Sheehan,and Margaret M. Ulchak- other signs of systemic infection appear. As a result,even
er. “Diabetes Mellitus.”In Family Medicine,Principles minor irritations occur more often,heal more slowly,and
and Practice.5th ed. Ed. Robert B. Taylor. New York: are more likely to result in serious health problems.
Springer-Verlag,1998.
With diabetes,foot infections occur more frequently
because the disease causes nervous system changes and
PERIODICALS
“Trends in the Prevalence and Incidence of Self-Reported Dia- poor circulation. Because the nerves that control sweat-
betes Mellitus-United States,1980-1994.”Morbidity & ing no longer work,the skin of the feet can become very
Mortality Weekly Report46 (1997):1014-1018. dry and cracked, and calluses tend to occur more fre-
“Updated Guidelines for the Diagnosis of Diabetes in the US.” quently and build up faster. If not trimmed regularly,
Drugs & Therapy Perspectives10 (1997):12-13. these calluses can turn into open sores or ulcers. Because
diabetic nerve damage can cause a loss of sensation (neu-
ORGANIZATIONS
ropathy),if the feet are not regularly inspected,an ulcer
American Diabetes Association. 1701 North Beauregard Street,
can quickly become infected and, if not treated, may
Alexandria,VA 22311. (800) 342-2383. <http://www.
result in the deathof tissue (gangrene) or amputation.
diabetes.org>.
American Dietetic Association. 216 W. Jackson Blvd.,Chicago, The risk of infection is greatest for people who are
IL 60606-6995. (312) 899-0040. <http://www.eatright.org>. over the age of 60 and for those who have one or more of
Juvenile Diabetes Foundation. 120 Wall St.,19th Floor,New the following:
York,NY 10005. (800) 533-2873. <http://www.jdf.org>.
•poorly controlled diabetes
National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse. 1 Information
Way,Bethesda,MD 20892-3560. (800) 860-8747. <http:// •foot ulcers
www.niddk.nih.gov/health/diabetes/ndic.htm>.
•laser treatment for changes in the retina
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Dis-
eases (NIDDK). Building 31,Room 9A04,31 Center •kidney or vascular disease
Drive,MSC 2560,Bethesda,MD 208792-2560. (301)
•loss of sensation (neuropathy)
496-3583. <http://www.niddk.nih.gov>.
OTHER Causes and symptoms
Centers for Disease Control.<http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/
Bacteria can cause an infection through small cracks
ddt/ddthome.htm>.
(fissures) that can develop in the dry skin around the heel
“Insulin-Dependent Diabetes.”National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. National Institutes of and on other parts of the foot or through corns,calluses,
Health,NIH Publication No. 94-2098. blisters,hangnails,or ulcers. If not treated,the bacterial
“Noninsulin-Dependent Diabetes.”National Institute of Dia- infection can destroy skin, tissue, and bone or spread
betes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. National Insti- throughout the body.
tutes of Health,NIH Publication No. 92-241.
Common sites of diabetic foot infections include the
following:
Altha Roberts Edgren
•blisters,corns,or callouses that bleed beneath the skin
Diabetic control index see Glycosylated
•bunions, hammertoes, or other abnormalities in the
hemoglobin test bones of the foot
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1053
Diabetic
foot
infections
KEY TERMS
Fissure—A deep crack.
Neuropathy—An abnormality of the nerves out-
side the brain and spinal cord.
Ulcer—A sore or lesion.
dangerous to try alternative approaches without a doc-
tor’s approval or without consulting a trained practitioner
of alternative medicine.
Prognosis
Without proper treatment, diabetic foot infections
•scar tissue that has grown over the site of an earlier can lead to serious illness, gangrene, amputation, and
infection even death if the infection spreads throughout the body.
If treated properly and the patient practices good foot
•foot ulcers caused by pressure,nerve damage,or poor
care,the prognosis is generally optimistic
circulation (Ulcers occur most often over the ball of the
foot,on the bottom of the big toe,or on the sides of the
foot due to poorly fitting shoes.) Prevention
•injuries that tear or puncture the skin.
There are many things that a diabetic individual can
do to prevent the occurrence of foot infections,including
Diagnosis the following:
•control blood glucose and do not allow it to get too high
A physician who specializes in the treatment of the
foot (podiatrist) or the doctor who normally treats the •avoid smoking
patient’s diabetes will treat the infection. An x ray of the
•keep blood pressure and cholesterol under control
foot will be taken to determine whether the bone has
become infected. A sample from the wound will be cul- •exercise to stimulate blood flow
tured to identify the organism that is causing the infec- •keep feet clean,dry,and warm
tion so that the appropriate antibiotic can be selected.
•check your feet every day for blisters, scratches, and
skin that is hard,broken,inflamed or that feels hot or
Treatment cold when touched
From the results of the culture, the appropriate •after bathing,carefully dry feet and apply thin coat of
antibiotic will be prescribed. Any dead or infected tissue petroleum jelly or hand cream to prevent dry skin from
will be surgically removed and, if necessary, a cast cracking
and/or special shoes may be used to protect the area. In
•use a pumice stone and emery board to trim calluses
addition,the patient will be instructed to keep off their
feet. If the ulcer does not heal, the physician may per- •do not neglect an ulcer,should one develop
form surgery to increase blood flow to the foot. It is also
important for the patient to practice good diabetes con- Resources
trol and keep blood glucose levels from getting too high.
BOOKS
Bennett,J. Claude,and Fred Plum,eds. Cecil Textbook of Med-
Alternative treatment icine.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
The Editors of Time-Life Books. The Medical Advisor:The
Acupuncture and vitamin C can boost the body’s
Complete Guide to Alternative and Conventional Treat-
infection-fighting ability. A variety of other vitaminsand
ments.Alexandria,VA:Time Life,Inc.,1996.
herbs may improve general health and diabetes control. Marble,Alexander,et al.,eds. Joslin’s Diabetes Mellitus.12th
Because diabetes is a potentially deadly disease,it can be ed. Philadelphia:Lea & Jebiger,1985.
1054 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoitcefni
toof
citebaiD
Persons with diabetes often suffer from foot ulcers,as
shown above.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by
permission.)
ORGANIZATIONS Causes and symptoms
American Diabetes Association. 1701 North Beauregard Street,
DKA is most commonly seen in individuals with
Alexandria,VA 22311. (800) 342-2383. <http://www.
diabetes.org>. type I diabetes, under 19 years of age and is usually
Juvenile Diabetes Foundation. 120 Wall St.,19th Floor,New caused by the interruption of their insulin treatment or
York,NY 10005. (800) 533-2873. <http://www.jdf.org>. by acute infection or trauma. A small number of people
National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse. 1 Information with type II diabetes also experience ketoacidosis,but
Way,Bethesda,MD 20892-3560. (800) 860-8747. this is rare given the fact that type II diabetics still pro-
<http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health/diabetes/ndic.htm>. duce some insulin naturally. When DKA occurs in type
II patients, it is usually caused by a decrease in food
OTHER
intake and an increased insulin deficiency due to hyper-
“Foot Care.”American Diabetes Association.17 Feb. 1998
glycemia.
<http://www.diabetes.org>.
Some common DKA symptoms include:
Maureen Haggerty
•high blood sugar levels
•frequent urination (polyuria) and thirst
•fatigue and lethargy
•nausea
Diabetic ketoacidosis
•vomiting
Definition •abdominal pain
Diabetic ketoacidosis is a dangerous complication of •fruity odor to breath
diabetes mellitusin which the chemical balance of the
•rapid,deep breathing
body becomes far too acidic.
•muscle stiffness or aching
•coma
Description
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) always results from a
Diagnosis
severe insulin deficiency. Insulin is the hormone secret-
ed by the body to lower the blood sugar levels when Diagnosis requires the demonstration of hyper-
they become too high. Diabetes mellitus is the disease glycemia,hyperketonemia,and acidosis. DKA is estab-
resulting from the inability of the body to produce or lished if the patient’s urine or blood is strongly positive
respond properly to insulin, required by the body to for glucose and ketones. Normal glucose levels in a non-
convert glucose to energy. In childhood diabetes,DKA diabetic person on average range from 80–110 mg/dl. A
complications represent the leading cause of death, person with diabetes will typically fluctuate outside
mostly due to the accumulation of abnormally large those parameters. DKA glucose levels exceed 250 mg/dl
amounts of fluid in the brain (cerebral edema). DKA and can reach 400 to 800 mg/dL. A low serum bicarbon-
combines three major features:hyperglycemia,mean- ate level (usually below 15 mEq/L) is also present,
ing excessively high blood sugar kevels hyperketone- indicative of acidosis.
mia, meaning an overproduction of ketones by the
A blood test or urinalysis can quickly determine
body; and acidosis,meaning that the blood has become
the concentration of glucose in the bloodstream. Test
too acidic.
strips are available to patients commercially can sub-
Insulin deficiency is responsible for all three condi- merge in urine to detect the presence or concentration
tions:the body glucose goes largely unused since most of ketones.
cells are unable to transport glucose into the cell without
the presence of insulin; this condition makes the body
Treatment
use stored fat as an alternative source instead of the
unavailable glucose for energy,a process that produces Ketoacidosis is treated under medical supervision
acidic ketones, which build up because they require and usually in a hospital setting.
insulin to be broken down. The presence of excess
Basic treatment includes:
ketones in the bloodstream in turn causes the blood to
become more acidic than the body tissues,which creates •administering insulin to correct the hyperglycemia and
a toxic condition. hyperketonemia
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1055
Diabetic
ketoacidosis
KEY TERMS
Acidosis—A condition that causes the pH of the glucose and the levels of glucose in the blood by
blood to drop and become more acidic. acting to open the cells so that they can intake glu-
cose.
Diabetes mellitus—Disease characterized by the
inability of the body to produce or respond properly Ketones—Poisonous acidic chemicals produced by
to insulin, which is required by the body to convert the body when fat instead of glucose is burned for
glucose to energy. energy. Breakdown of fat occurs when not enough
Edema—The presence of abnormally large amounts insulin is present to channel glucose into body cells.
of fluid in the intercellular tissue spaces of the body. Lactic acidosis—A serious condition caused by the
Glucose—The type of sugar found in the blood. build up of lactic acid in the blood, causing it to
become excessively acidic. Lactic acid is a by-prod-
Hyperglycemia—Condition characterized by exces-
uct of glucose metabolism.
sively high levels of glucose in the blood, and
occurs when the body does not have enough Metabolism—The sum of all chemical reactions
insulin or cannot use the insulin it does have to turn that occur in the body resulting in growth, transfor-
glucose into energy. Hyperglycemia is often indica- mation of foodstuffs into energy, waste elimination
tive of diabetes that is out of control. and other bodily functions.
Hyperketonemia—Condition characterized by an Polyuria—Excessive secretion of urine.
overproduction of ketones by the body.
Type I diabetes—Also called juvenile diabetes. Type
Hypoglycemia—Lower than normal levels of glu- I diabetes typically begins early in life. Affected
cose in the blood. individuals have a primary insulin deficiency and
Hypokalemia—A deficiency of potassium in the must take insulin to stay alive.
blood.
Type II diabetes—Type II diabetes is the most com-
Insulin—A hormone secreted by the pancreas in mon form of diabetes and usually appears in middle
response to high blood sugar levels that induces aged adults. It is often associated with obesity and
hypoglycemia. Insulin regulates the body’s use of may be delayed or controlled with diet and exercise.
•Replacing fluids intravenously lost through excessive ing periods of stress,infection,and trauma when glucose
urination and vomiting concentrations typically increase as a response to these
situations. Ketone tests should also be performed during
•Balancing electrolytes to re-establish the chemical
these periods or when glucose is elevated.
equilibrium of the blood and prevent potassium defi-
ciency (hypokalemia) during treatment
Resources
•Treatment for any associated bacterial infection
BOOKS
Saudek,Christopher D.,Richard R. Rubin,and Cynthia S.
Prognosis
Shump. The Johns Hopkins Guide to Diabetes.Baltimore:
With proper medical attention, DKA is almost The Johns Hopkins University Press,1997.
always successfully treated. The DKA mortality rate is
ORGANIZATIONS
about 10%. Coma on admission adversely affects the
American Diabetes Association. 1701 North Beauregard Street,
prognosis. The major causes of death are circulatory col-
Alexandria,VA 22311.(800)-342-2383. <http://www.dia-
lapse,hypokalemia,infection,and cerebral edema.
betes.org/>.
Juvenile Diabetes Foundation. 120 Wall St.,New York,NY
Prevention 10005. (800) 533-CURE. <http://www.jdf.org/>.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disor-
Once diabetes has been diagnosed,prevention mea-
ders (NIDDK). 31 Center Drive,MSC 2560,Bethesda,
sures to avoid DKA include regular monitoring of blood
MD 20892-2560. <http://www.niddk.nih.gov>.
glucose,administration of insulin,and lifestyle mainte-
nance. Glucose monitoring is especially important dur- Gary Gilles
1056 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisodicaotek
citebaiD
There is a wide range of symptoms associated with
Diabetic neuropathy diabetic neuropathy, and they depend on which nerves
and parts of the body affected and also on the type of
Definition neuropathy present. Some patients have very mild symp-
toms,while others are severely disabled.
Diabetic neuropathy is a nerve disorder caused by
diabetes mellitus. Diabetic neuropathy may be diffuse, Common symptoms of diffuse peripheral neuropa-
affecting several parts of the body,or focal,affecting a thy include:
specific nerve and part of the body.
•numbness and feelings of tingling or burning
•insensitivity to pain
Description
•needle-like jabs of pain
The nervous system consists of two major divisions: •extreme sensitivity to touch
the central nervous systems (CNS) which includes the
•loss of balance and coordination
brain, the cranial nerves, and the spinal cord, and the
Common symptoms of diffuse autonomic neuropa-
peripheral nervous system (PNS) which includes the
thy include:
nerves that link the CNS with the sensory organs,mus-
cles,blood vessels,and glands of the body. These periph- •impaired urination and sexual function
eral nerves are either motor, meaning that they are
•bladder infections
involved in motor activity such as walking,or sensory,
•stomach disorders, due to the impaired ability of the
meaning that they carry sensory information back to the
stomach to empty (gastric stasis)
CNS. The PNS also works with the CNS to regulate
involuntary (autonomic) processes such as breathing, •nausea,vomiting,bloating
heartbeat,blood pressure,etc.
•dizziness,lightheadedness,faintingspells
There are two types of diffuse diabetic neuropathy
•loss of appetite
that affect different nervous system functions. Diffuse
Common symptoms of focal neuropathy include:
peripheral neuropathyprimarily affects the limbs,dam-
aging the nerves of the feet and hands. Autonomic neu- •pain in the front of a thigh
ropathy is the other form of diffuse neuropathy and it
•severe pain in the lower back
affects the heart and other internal organs.
•pain in the chest or stomach
Focal—or localized—diabetic neuropathy affects
•ache behind an eye
specific nerves,most commonly in the torso,leg,or head.
•double vision
Diabetic neuropathy can lead to muscular weakness,
loss of feeling or sensation,and loss of autonomic func- •paralysis on one side of the face
tions such as digestion, erection, bladder control and
In severe diabetic neuropathy loss of sensation can
sweating among others.
lead to injuries that are unnoticed,progressing to infec-
The longer a person has diabetes,the more likely the tions,ulceration,and possibly amputation.
development of one or more forms of neuropathy.
Approximately 60–70% of patients with diabetes have Diagnosis
neuropathy,but only about 5% will experience painful
symptoms. The diagnosis of neuropathy is based on the symp-
toms that present during a physical exam. Pain assess-
ment is usually the first step. Patients may have more
Causes and symptoms than one type of pain, and the history helps the doctor
determine whether a the pain has a neuropathic cause.
The exact cause of diabetic neuropathy is not
known. Researchers believe that the process of nerve The exam may include:
damage is related to high glucose concentrations in the
•a screening test for lost sensation
blood that could cause chemical changes in nerves,dis-
•nerve conduction studies to check the flow of electric
rupting their ability to effectively send messages. High
current through a nerve
blood glucose is also known to damage the blood vessels
that carry oxygen and other nutrients to the nerves. In •electromyography (EMG) to see how well muscles
addition,some people may have a genetic predisposition respond to electrical impulses transmitted by nearby
to develop neuropathy. nerves.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1057
Diabetic
neuropathy
Prognosis
KEY TERMS
Early stage diabetic neuropathy can usually be
reversed with good glucose control. Once nerve damage
Central nervous system (CNS)—Part of the ner-
has occurred it cannot be reversed. The prognosis is largely
vous system consisting of the brain, cranial nerves,
dependent on the management of the underlying condition,
and spinal cord. The brain is the center of higher
diabetes,which may halt the progression of the neuropathy
processes, such as thought and emotion, and is
and improve symptoms. Recovery,if it occurs,is slow.
responsible for the coordination and control of
bodily activities and the interpretation of informa-
Prevention
tion from the senses. The cranial nerves and spinal
cord link the brain to the peripheral nervous sys- Tight glucose control and the avoidance of alcohol
tem. and cigarettes help protect nerves from damage.
Diabetes mellitus—Disease characterized by the
inability of the body to produce or respond prop- Resources
erly to insulin, required by the body to convert
BOOKS
glucose to energy.
Saudek,Christopher D.,Richard R. Rubin,and Cynthia S.
Glucose—The type of sugar found in the blood. Shump. The Johns Hopkins Guide to Diabetes.Baltimore:
The Johns Hopkins University Press,1997.
Peripheral nervous system (PNS)—One of the two
major divisions of the nervous system. PNS nerves ORGANIZATIONS
link the central nervous system with sensory American Diabetes Association. 1701 North Beauregard Street,
organs, muscles, blood vessels, and glands. Alexandria,VA 22311. (800) 342-2383). <http://www.dia-
betes.org/>.
Juvenile Diabetes Foundation. 120 Wall St.,New York,NY
10005. (800) 533-CURE. <http://www.jdf.org/>.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disor-
•ultrasound to show how the bladder and other parts of
ders (NIDDK). 31 Center Drive,MSC 2560,Bethesda,
the urinary tract are functioning
MD 20892-2560. <http://www.niddk.nih.gov>.
•sometimes a nerve biopsy may be performed.
Gary Gilles
Specialists who treat diabetic neuropathy include:
•neurologists:specialists in nervous system disorders
•urologists:specialists in urinary tract disorder
•gastroenterologists:specialists in digestive disorders
Dialysis, kidney
•podiatrists:specialists in caring for the feet
Definition
Treatment Dialysis treatment replaces the function of the kid-
neys,which normally serve as the body’s natural filtra-
Treatment of diabetic neuropathy is usually focused
tion system. Through the use of a blood filter and a
on treating the symptoms associated with the neuropathy
chemical solution known as dialysate, the treatment
and addressing the underlying cause by improving the
removes waste products and excess fluids from the
control of blood sugar levels,which may heal the early
bloodstream,while maintaining the proper chemical bal-
stages of neuropathy.
ance of the blood. There are two types of dialysis treat-
There is no cure for the permanent nerve damage
ment :hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.
caused by neuropathy. To help control pain,the choice of
proven drug therapies has broadened during the past
Purpose
decade. Pain medication,such as the topical skin cream
capsaicin,is usually no stronger than codeine because of Dialysis can be used in the treatment of patients suf-
the potential for addiction with long-term use of such fering from poisoning or overdose, in order to quickly
drugs. Four main classes of drugs are available for pain remove drugs from the bloodstream. Its most prevalent
management,alone or in combination:tricyclic antide- application,however,is for patients with temporary or per-
pressants (Imipramine, Nortriptyline), narcotic anal- manent kidney failure. For patients with end-stage renal
gesics (Morphine), anticonvulsants (Carbamazepine, disease (ESRD),whose kidneys are no longer capable of
Gabapentin),and antiarrhythmics. adequately removing fluids and wastes from their body or
1058 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yendik
,sisylaiD
of maintaining the proper level of certain kidney-regulated Hemodialysis
chemicals in the bloodstream,dialysis is the only treat-
Hemodialysis is the most frequently prescribed type
ment option available outside of kidney transplantation.
of dialysis treatment in the United States. The treatment
In 1996 in the United States,over 200,000 people under-
involves circulating the patient’s blood outside of the
went regular dialysis treatments to manage their ESRD.
body through an extracorporeal circuit (ECC),or dialysis
circuit. Two needles are inserted into the patient’s vein,
Precautions or access site,and are attached to the ECC,which con-
sists of plastic blood tubing,a filter known as a dialyzer
Blood pressure changes associated with hemodialy-
(artificial kidney),and a dialysis machine that monitors
sis may pose a risk for patients with heart problems. Peri-
and maintains blood flow and administers dialysate.
toneal dialysis may be the preferred treatment option in
Dialysate is a chemical bath that is used to draw waste
these cases.
products out of the blood.
Peritoneal dialysis is not recommended for patients
with abdominal adhesions or other abdominal defects, Since the 1980s,the majority of hemodialysis treat-
such as a hernia,that might compromise the efficiency ments in the United States have been performed with
of the treatment. It is also not recommended for patients hollow fiber dialyzers. A hollow fiber dialyzer is com-
who suffer frequent bouts of diverticulitis,an inflamma- posed of thousands of tube-like hollow fiber strands
tion of small pouches in the intestinal tract. encased in a clear plastic cylinder several inches in diam-
eter. There are two compartments within the dialyzer (the
blood compartment and the dialysate compartment). The
Description
membrane that separates these two compartments is
There are two types of dialysis treatment:hemodial- semipermeable. This means that it allows the passage of
ysis and peritoneal dialysis: certain sized molecules across it, but prevents the pas-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1059
Dialysis,
kidney
Hemodialyzer (where
filtering takes place)
Hemodialysis machine
Blood flows
to dialyzer
Cleansed blood
flows back to body
Hemodialysis is the most frequently prescribed type of dialysis treatment in the United States.This treatment involves circu-
lating the patient’s blood outside of the body through a dialysis circuit.The blood is filtered and cleansed inside the hemodia-
lyzer and returned to the body.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
in the dialysate solution cross the membrane into the
KEY TERMS blood compartment. The purified,chemically-balanced
blood is then returned to the body.
Access site—The vein tapped for vascular access Most hemodialysis patients require treatment three
in hemodialysis treatments. For patients with tem- times a week,for an average of three to four hours per
porary treatment needs, access to the bloodstream dialysis “run.”Specific treatment schedules depend on
is gained by inserting a catheter into the subcla- the type of dialyzer used and the patient’s current physi-
vian vein near the patient’s collarbone. Patients in cal condition. While the treatment prescription and regi-
long-term dialysis require stronger, more durable men is usually overseen by a nephrologist (a doctor that
access sites, called fistulas or grafts, that are surgi- specializes in the kidney),dialysis treatments are typical-
cally-created. ly administered by a nurse or patient care technician in
Dialysate—A chemical bath used in dialysis to outpatient clinics known as dialysis centers,or in hospi-
draw fluids and toxins out of the bloodstream and tal-based dialysis units. In-home hemodialysis treatment
supply electrolytes and other chemicals to the is also an option for some patients, although access to
bloodstream. this type of treatment may be limited by financial and
lifestyle factors. An investment in equipment is required
Dialysis prescription—The general parameters of
and another person in the household should be available
dialysis treatment that vary according to each
for support and assistance with treatments.
patient’s individual needs. Treatment length, type
of dialyzer and dialysate used, and rate of ultrafil-
tration are all part of the dialysis prescription. Peritoneal dialysis
Dialyzer—An artificial kidney usually composed In peritoneal dialysis,the patient’s peritoneum,or lin-
of hollow fiber that is used in hemodialysis to ing of the abdomen,acts as a blood filter. A catheter is sur-
eliminate waste products from the blood and gically inserted into the patient’s abdomen. During treat-
remove excess fluids from the bloodstream. ment,the catheter is used to fill the abdominal cavity with
dialysate. Waste products and excess fluids move from the
Erythropoietin—A hormone produced by the kid-
patient’s bloodstream into the dialysate solution. After a
neys that stimulates the production of red blood
waiting period of six to 24 hours,depending on the treat-
cells by bone marrow.
ment method used, the waste-filled dialysate is drained
ESRD—End-stage renal disease; chronic or perma-
from the abdomen,and replaced with clean dialysate.
nent kidney failure.
There are three types of peritoneal dialysis:
Extracorporeal circuit (ECC)—The path the
•Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD). A
hemodialysis patient’s blood takes outside of the
continuous treatment that is self-administered and
body. It typically consists of plastic tubing, a
requires no machine. The patient inserts fresh dialysate
hemodialysis machine, and a dialyzer.
solution into the abdominal cavity, waits four to six
Hematocrit (Hct) level—A measure of red blood
hours,and removes the used solution. The solution is
cells.
immediately replaced with fresh dialysate. A bag
Peritoneum—The abdominal cavity; the peri- attached to the catheter is worn under clothing.
toneum acts as a blood filter in peritoneal dialysis.
•Continuous cyclic peritoneal dialysis (CCPD). An
overnight treatment that uses a machine to drain and
refill the abdominal cavity, CCPD takes 10–12 hours
per session.
sage of other, larger molecules. As blood is pushed
through the blood compartment in one direction,suction •Intermittent peritoneal dialysis (IPD). This hospital-
or vacuum pressure pulls the dialysate through the based treatment is performed several times a week. A
dialysate compartment in a countercurrent,or opposite machine administers and drains the dialysate solution,
direction. These opposing pressures work to drain excess and sessions can take up to 24 hours.
fluids out of the bloodstream and into the dialysate, a
Peritoneal dialysis is often the treatment option of
process called ultrafiltration.
choice in infants and children, whose small size can
A second process called diffusion moves waste make vascular (through a vein) access difficult to main-
products in the blood across the membrane into the tain. Peritoneal dialysis can also be done outside of a
dialysate compartment,where they are carried out of the clinical setting, which is more conducive to regular
body. At the same time,electrolytes and other chemicals school attendance.
1060 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yendik
,sisylaiD
Preparation treatment. Adjustment of the dialysis prescription often
helps alleviate many symptoms.
Patients are weighed immediately before and after
each hemodialysis treatment to assess their fluid reten-
Hypotension
tion. Blood pressure and temperature are taken and the
patient is assessed for physical changes since their last Because of the stressplaced on the cardiovascular
dialysis run. Regular blood tests monitor chemical and system with regular hemodialysis treatments,patients are
waste levels in the blood. Prior to treatment,patients are at risk for hypotension,a sudden drop in blood pressure.
typically administered a dose of heparin,an anticoagu- This can often be controlled by medication and adjust-
lant that prevents blood clotting,to ensure the free flow ment of the patient’s dialysis prescription.
of blood through the dialyzer and an uninterrupted dialy-
sis run for the patient. Infection
Both hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis patients
Aftercare are at risk for infection. Hemodialysis patients should
keep their access sites clean and watch for signs of red-
Both hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis patients
ness and warmth that could indicate infection. Peritoneal
need to be vigilant about keeping their access sites and
dialysis patients must follow the same precautions with
catheters clean and infection-free during and between
their catheter. Peritonitis,an infection of the peritoneum,
dialysis runs.
causes flu-like symptoms and can disrupt dialysis treat-
Dialysis is just one facet of a comprehensive treat- ments if not caught early.
ment approach for ESRD. Although dialysis treatment is
very effective in removing toxins and fluids from the Infectious diseases
body,there are several functions of the kidney it cannot
Because there is a great deal of blood exposure
mimic, such as regulating high blood pressure and red
involved in dialysis treatment,a slight risk of contracting
blood cell production. Patients with ESRD need to watch
hepatitis Band hepatitis Cexists. The hepatitis B vacci-
their diet and fluid intake carefully and take medications
nationis recommended for most hemodialysis patients.
as prescribed to manage their disease.
As of 1997,there has only been one documented case of
HIV being transmitted in a United States dialysis unit to
Risks a staff member, and no documented cases of HIV ever
being transmitted between dialysis patients in the United
Many of the risks and side effects associated with
States. The strict standards of infection controlpracticed
dialysis are a combined result of both the treatment and
in modern hemodialysis units makes the chance of con-
the poor physical condition of the ESRD patient. Dialy-
tracting one of these diseases very small.
sis patients should always report side effects to their
healthcare provider.
Normal results
Anemia
Puffiness in the patient related to edema, or fluid
Hematocrit (Hct) levels, a measure of red blood retention,may be relieved after dialysis treatment. The
cells,are typically low in ESRD patients. This deficiency patient’s overall sense of physical well-being may also
is caused by a lack of the hormone erythropoietin,which be improved. Because dialysis is an ongoing treatment
is normally produced by the kidneys. The problem is ele- process for many patients,a baseline for normalcy can be
vated in hemodialysis patients,who may incur blood loss difficult to gauge.
during hemodialysis treatments. Epoetin alfa, or EPO
(sold under the trade name Epogen),a hormone therapy, Resources
and intravenous or oral iron supplements are used to
BOOKS
manage anemia in dialysis patients.
Bock,G. H.,E. J. Ruley,and M. P. Moore. A Parent’s Guide to
Kidney Disorders. Minneapolis:University of Minnesota
Cramps, nausea, vomiting, and headaches Press,1993.
Cameron,J. S. Kidney Failure:The Facts.New York:Oxford
Some hemodialysis patients experience cramps and
University Press,1996.
flu-like symptoms during treatment. These can be caused
Lazarus,J. Michael,and Raymond M. Hakim. “Medical
by a number of factors,including the type of dialysate
Aspects of Hemodialysis.”In The Kidney,ed. Barry M.
used,composition of the dialyzer membrane,water qual- Brenner and Floyd C. Rector Jr. Philadelphia:W. B. Saun-
ity in the dialysis unit,and the ultrafiltration rate of the ders Co.,1991.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1061
Dialysis,
kidney
National Kidney Foundation. Dialysis Outcomes Quality Ini- causes of dermatitis in the diaper area is prolonged skin
tiatives (NOQI).Vol. 1-5. New York:National Kidney contact with wetness. Under these circumstances,natural
Foundation,1997. oils are stripped away,the outer layer of skin is damaged,
Nissenson,Allen R.,and Richard N. Fine,eds. Dialysis Thera- and there is increased susceptibility to infection by bacte-
py.2nd ed. Philadelphia:Hanley & Belfus,Inc.,1993.
ria or yeast.
Nolph,Karl D. “Peritoneal Dialysis.”In The Kidney,ed. Barry
M. Brenner and Floyd C. Rector Jr. Philadelphia:W. B. Diaper rash is a term that covers a broad variety of
Saunders Co.,1991. skin conditions that occur on the same area of the body.
U.S. Renal Data System. USRDS 1997 Annual Data Report. Some babies are more prone to diaper rash than others.
Bethesda,MD:The National Institutes of Health,National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases,
1996. Causes and symptoms
PERIODICALS Frequently a flat,red rash is caused by simple chaf-
Degroot,Patricia J.,Sally Rubens Kenler,and Johanna T. ing of the diaper against tender skin,initiating a friction
Dwyer. “Optimizing Dialysis:Past,Present,and Future.” rash. This type of rash is not seen in the skin folds. It may
Nutrition Today32 (Jan/Feb. 1997):30-6. be more pronounced around the edges of the diaper,at
“Dialysis:Need for Artificial Kidney Treatment Is Increasing.”
the waist and leg bands. The baby generally doesn’t
Mayo Clinic Health Letter,15 (Feb. 1997):1-4.
appear to experience much discomfort. Sometimes the
Favero,Martin S. “Infection Control.”Dialysis and Transplan-
chemicals or detergents in the diaper are contributing
tation25 (Oct. 1996):699-702.
factors and may result in contact dermatitis. These
Friedman,Elia A. “End-Stage Renal Disease Therapy:An
rashes should clear up easily with proper attention.
American Success Story.”The Journal of the American
Medical Association275 (Apr. 1996):1118-22. Ignoring the condition may lead to a secondary infection
that is more difficult to resolve.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Association of Kidney Patients. 100 S. Ashley Dr., Friction of skin against itself can cause a rash in the
#280,Tampa,FL 33602. (800) 749-2257. <http://www. baby’s skin folds,called intertrigo. This rash appears as
aakp.org>. reddened areas that may ooze and is often uncomfortable
American Kidney Fund. 6110 Executive Boulevard,Rockville, when the diaper is wet. Intertrigo can also be found on
MD 20852. (800) 638-8299. <http://216.248.130.102/ other areas of the body where there are deep skin folds
Default.htm>. that tend to trap moisture.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Dis-
eases (NIDDK). Building 31,Room 9A04,31 Center Seborrheic dermatitisis the diaper area equivalent
Drive,MSC 2560,Bethesda,MD 208792-2560. (301) of cradle cap. It is scaly and greasy in appearance and
496-3583. <http://www.niddk.nih.gov>. may be worse in the folds of the skin.
National Kidney Foundation. 30 East 33rd St.,New York,NY
Yeast, or candidal dermatitis, is the most common
10016. (800) 622-9010. <http://www.kidney.org>.
infectious cause of diaper rash. The affected areas are
United States Renal Data System (USRDS). The University of
raised and quite red with distinct borders, and satellite
Michigan,315 W. Huron,Suite 240,Ann Arbor,MI 48103.
lesions may occur around the edges. Yeast is part of the
(734) 998-6611. <http://www.med.umich.edu/usrds>.
normal skin flora, and is often an opportunistic invader
Paula Anne Ford-Martin when simple diaper rash is untreated. It is particularly
common after treatment with antibiotics,which kill the
good bacteria that normally keep the yeast population in
check. Usual treatments for diaper rash will not clear it up.
Repeated or difficult to resolve episodes of yeast infection
may warrant further medical attention,since this is some-
Diaper rash
times associated with diabetes or immune problems.
Definition
Another infectious cause of diaper rash is impetigo.
Dermatitisof the buttocks,genitals,lower abdomen, This bacterial infection is characterized by blisters that
or thigh folds of an infant or toddler is commonly referred ooze and crust.
to as diaper rash.
Diagnosis
Description
The presence of skin lesions in the diaper area
The outside layer of skin normally forms a protec- means that the baby has diaper rash. However,there are
tive barrier that prevents infection. One of the primary several types of rash that may require specific treatment
1062 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
hsar
repaiD
in order to heal. It is useful to be able to distinguish them
by appearance as described above.
A baby with a rash that does not clear up within two
to three days or a rash with blisters or bleeding should be
seen by a healthcare professional for further evaluation.
Treatment
Antibiotics are generally prescribed for rashes
caused by bacteria,particularly impetigo. This may be a
topical or oral formulation,depending on the size of the
area involved and the severity of the infection.
Over-the-counter antifungal creams,such as Lotrim-
in,are often recommended to treat a rash resulting from
yeast. If topical treatment is not effective,an oral antifun-
gal may be prescribed.
Mild steroid creams, such as 0.5–1% hydrocorti- from the additional insult of urine and stool,particularly
sone, can be used for seborrheic dermatitis and some- if the baby has diarrhea. Cornstarch powder may be
times intertrigo. Prescription strength creams may be used on rashes that are moist,such as impetigo.
needed for short-term treatment of more stubborn cases.
Nutrition
What the baby eats can make a difference in stool fre-
Alternative treatment
quency and acidity. Typically,breast-fed babies will have
Good diaper hygiene will prevent or clear up many fewer problems with rashes. When adding a new food to
simple cases of diaper rash. Diapers should be checked the diet, the baby should be observed closely to see
very frequently and changed as soon as they are wet or whether rashes are produced around the baby’s mouth or
soiled. Good air circulation is also important for healthy anus. If this occurs,the new food should be discontinued.
skin. Babies should have some time without wearing a
Babies who are taking antibiotics are more likely to
diaper,and a waterproof pad can be used to protect the
get rashes due to yeast. To help bring the good bacterial
bed or other surface. Rubber pants,or other occlusive fab-
counts back to normal, Lactobacillus bifidus can be
rics,should not be used over the diaper area. Some cloth-
added to the diet. It is available in powder form from
like disposable diapers promote better air circulation than
most health food stores.
plastic-type diapers. It may be necessary for mothers to
experiment with diaper types to see if the baby’s skin
Herbal treatment
reacts better to cloth or disposable ones. If disposable dia-
pers are used,the baby’s skin may react differently to var- Some herbal preparations can be useful for diaper
ious brands. If the baby is wearing cloth diapers, they rash. Calendula reduces inflammation,tightens tissues,
should be washed in a mild detergent and double rinsed. and disinfects. It has been recommended for seborrheic
dermatitis as well as for general inflammation of the
The diaper area should be cleaned with something
skin. The ointment should be applied at each diaper
mild, even plain water. Some wipes contain alcohol or
change. Chickweed ointment can also be soothing for
chemicals that can be irritating for some babies. Plain
irritated skin and may be applied once or twice daily.
water may be the best cleansing substance when there is
a rash. Using warm water in a spray bottle (or giving a
quick bath) and then lightly patting the skin dry can pro- Prognosis
duce less skin trauma than using wipes. In the event of
Treated appropriately,diaper rash will resolve fairly
suspected yeast, a tablespoon of cider vinegar can be
quickly if there is no underlying health problem or skin
added to a cup of warm water and used as a cleansing
disease.
solution. This is dilute enough that it should not burn,but
acidifies the skin pH enough to hamper the yeast growth.
Prevention
Barrier ointments can be valuable to treat rashes.
Those that contain zinc oxide are especially effective. Frequent diaper changes are important to keep the
These creams and ointments protect already irritated skin skin dry and healthy. Application of powders and oint-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1063
Diaper
rash
Baby with severe diaper rash.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.
Reproduced by permission.)
Description
KEY TERMS
Prior to insertion,the inside of the dome and the rim
are covered with a thick layer (perhaps a tablespoon) of a
Dermatitis—Inflammation of the skin.
spermicide that is compatible with the diaphragm being
used. The domed area covers the opening into the uterus
(cervix) and keeps the spermicide in place. As a result,
any sperm that might get under the diaphragm will be
ments is not necessary when there is no rash. Finding the destroyed.
best combination of cleansing and diapering products for
Diaphragms may be inserted two to three hours prior
the individual baby will also help to prevent diaper rash.
to intercourse,and must be left in place for six to eight
hours following sexual relations. During this time the
Resources
woman may not swim, bathe, or douche, but she may
BOOKS shower. If she desires to have intercourse again before
Eisenberg,Arlene,Heidi Murkoff,and Sandee Hathaway. What the six to eight hours have passed,the diaphragm should
to Expect the First Year.New York:Workman Publishing, not be removed. Instead,an applicator full of spermicide
1989. should be deposited into the vagina.
Sears,William,and Martha Sears. The Baby Book.Boston:Lit-
A diaphragm will last for a year or more. It should
tle,Brown and Company,1993.
be examined weekly for holes. This can be done by hold-
OTHER ing it up to the light or filling it with water.
Greene,Alan. “Diaper Rash.”Dr. Greene’s HouseCalls.
<http:// drgreene.com/960430.asp> (1996).
Preparation
Judith Turner
Before inserting the diaphragm,the woman should
empty her bladder and wash her hands with soap and
water. The device should be checked for leaks by filling
it with water or holding it up to the light. A spermicidal
jelly is then applied to the inside and outside,and espe-
Diaphragm (birth control)
cially around the rim. While standing with one foot ele-
Definition vated on a chair or step, lying down, or squatting, the
woman folds the diaphragm inward toward the middle
Diaphragms are dome-shaped barrier methods of
and inserts it into the vagina as far as it will go.
contraceptionthat block sperm from entering the uterus.
They are made of latex (rubber) and formed like a shal-
low cup. Since vaginas vary in size, each patient will Aftercare
need to be fitted by a doctor or nurse with a diaphragm
When removed, the diaphragm should be washed
that conforms to the shape and contour of the vagina as
with a mild soap and water. After being dried,it can be
well as the strength of the muscles in the vaginal walls.
dusted with corn starch before being returned to its con-
Diaphragms must be used with spermicidal cream or
tainer. The diaphragm should always be stored away
jelly. The device should cause no discomfort,and neither
from sunlight and heat in a cool,dry place. It should not
the woman nor her partner should feel that it is there.
be washed with harsh or perfumed soaps or used with
perfumed powders because either of these substances can
Purpose damage the diaphragm.
The purpose of a diaphragm is to prevent access to
the womb (uterus) by the sperm and thus prevent concep-
Risks
tion. The level of effectiveness is about 95%.
Although rare,wearing the diaphragm longer than
the recommended time can result in toxic shock syn-
Precautions
drome. The signs and symptoms of this serious illness
Each client will undergo a physical examinationand include sudden onset of high fever,vomiting,diarrhea,
a Pap smear. If these are normal,the physician will fit the dizziness, faintness, weakness, aching muscles and
patient for the device and give instructions on how to joints,and rash. The doctor must be notified immediately
insert, remove, and clean the object. She will also be if any of these conditions appear. An allergic reaction to
taught the signs and symptoms of potential complications. the spermicide or the material from which the device is
1064 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
)lortnoc
htrib(
mgarhpaiD
KEY TERMS Diarrhea
Definition
Spermicide—A substance that kills sperm.
To most individuals, diarrhea means an increased
Toxic shock syndrome—An uncommon, but poten-
frequency or decreased consistency of bowel move-
tially fatal, disease that has been associated with the
ments; however, the medical definition is more exact
use of diaphragms and vaginal tampons. The symp-
than this. In many developed countries,the average num-
toms include high fever, vomiting, and diarrhea.
ber of bowel movements is three per day. However,
researchers have found that diarrhea best correlates with
an increase in stool weight; stool weights above 10 oz
made is also possible. Diaphragm use is also associated (300 g) per day generally indicates diarrhea. This is
with an increased risk of bladder infections. mainly due to excess water, which normally makes up
60–85% of fecal matter. In this way,true diarrhea is dis-
It should be noted that the diaphragm can become
tinguished from diseases that cause only an increase in
dislodged during intercourse, which could result in an
the number of bowel movements (hyperdefecation),or
unwanted pregnancy. To ensure a secure fit,a woman
incontinence (involuntary loss of bowel contents).
should be examined for a refitting if she gains or loses
more than 10 lbs (4.5 kg),or after she gives birth. Diarrhea is also classified by physicians into acute,
which lasts one to two weeks,and chronic,which contin-
ues for longer than 23 weeks. Viral and bacterial infec-
Normal results
tions are the most common causes of acute diarrhea.
Consumers can expect an efficiency rate of about
95% in preventing pregnancy. Using a male condomin
Description
conjunction with the diaphragm decreases the potential
for pregnancy. Diaphragms provide no protection against In many cases, acute infectious diarrhea is a mild,
AIDSor other sexually transmitted diseases. limited annoyance. However,worldwide acute infectious
diarrhea has a huge impact, causing over five million
Resources deaths per year. While most deaths are among children
under five years of age in developing nations,the impact,
BOOKS
even in developed countries,is considerable. For exam-
Dickason,Elizabeth Jean,Bonnie Lang Silverman,and Judith
ple,over 250,000 individuals are admitted to hospitals in
A. Kaplan. Maternal-Infant Nursing Care.3rd ed. St.
the United States each year because of one of these
Louis:Mosby-Year Book,Inc.,1998.
Gorrie,Trula Meyers,Emily Slone McKinney,and Sharon episodes. Rapid diagnosis and proper treatment can pre-
Smith Murray. Foundations of Maternal-Newborn Nurs- vent much of the suffering associated with these devas-
ing.2nd ed. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1998. tating illnesses.
Nichols,Francine H.,and Elaine Zwelling. Maternal-Newborn
Chronic diarrhea also has a considerable effect on
Nursing:Theory and Practice.Philadelphia.:W. B. Saun-
health, as well as on social and economic well being.
ders Co.,1997.
Patients with celiac disease, inflammatory bowel dis-
Olds,Sally B.,Marcia L. London,and Patricia Wieland
ease, and other prolonged diarrheal illnesses develop
Ladewig. Maternal-Newborn Nursing:A Family Centered
Approach.Menlo Park:Addison-Wesley,1996. nutritional deficiencies that diminish growth and immu-
nity. They affect social interaction and result in the loss
ORGANIZATIONS
of many working hours.
Planned Parenthood Federation of America,Inc. 810 Seventh
Ave.,New York,NY,10019. (800) 669-0156. <http://
www.plannedparenthood.org>. Causes and symptoms
OTHER Diarrhea occurs because more fluid passes through
“The Diaphragm.”Cincinnati Women’s Services.<http://gyn the large intestine (colon) than that organ can absorb. As
pages.com/cws/8.html>. a rule,the colon can absorb several times more fluid than
“Guide to Safer Sex.”Sexual Health InfoCenter.<http://www. is required on a daily basis. However,when this reserve
sexhealth.org/infocenter/GuideSS/diaphragm.htm>.
capacity is overwhelmed,diarrhea occurs.
Donald G. Barstow,RN Diarrhea is caused by infections or illnesses that
either lead to excess production of fluids or prevent
Diaphragmatic hernia see Hernia absorption of fluids. Also,certain substances in the colon,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1065
Diarrhea
such as fats and bile acids, can interfere with water Diagnosis
absorption and cause diarrhea. In addition,rapid passage
Most cases of acute diarrhea never need diagnosis or
of material through the colon can also do the same.
treatment,as many are mild and produce few problems.
Symptoms related to any diarrheal illness are often But patients with fever over 102°F (38.9°C), signs of
those associated with any injury to the gastrointestinal dehydration,bloody bowel movements,severe abdomi-
tract, such as fever, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal nal pain,known immune disease,or prior use of antibi-
pain. All or none of these may be present depending on otics need prompt medical evaluation.
the disease causing the diarrhea. The number of bowel
When diagnostic studies are needed,the most use-
movements can vary—up to 20 or more per day. In some
ful are stool culture and examination for parasites;
patients, blood or pus is present in the stool. Bowel
however these are often negative and a cause cannot be
movements may be difficult to flush (float) or contain
found in a large number of patients. The earlier cul-
undigested food material.
tures are performed,the greater the chance of obtain-
The most common causes of acute diarrhea are ing a positive result. For those with a history of antibi-
infections (the cause of traveler’s diarrhea), food otic use in the preceding two months, stool samples
poisoning, and medications. Medications are a fre- need to be examined for the toxins that cause antibiot-
quent and often over-looked cause,especially antibi- ic-associated colitis. Tests are also available to check
otics and antacids. Less often, various sugar free stool samples for microscopic amounts of blood and
foods, which sometimes contain poorly absorbable for cells that indicate severe inflammation of the colon.
materials,cause diarrhea. Examination with an endoscope is sometimes helpful
Chronic diarrhea is frequently due to many of the in determining severity and extent of inflammation.
same things that cause the shorter episodes (infections, Tests to check changes in blood chemistry (potassium,
medications, etc.); symptoms just last longer. Some magnesium,etc.) and a complete blood count(CBC)
infections can become chronic. This occurs mainly with are also often performed.
parasitic infections (such as Giardia) or when patients Chronic diarrhea is quite different,and most patients
have altered immunity (AIDS). with this condition will receive some degree of testing.
The following are the more usual causes of chronic Many exams are the same as for an acute episode, as
diarrhea: some infections and parasites cause both types of diar-
rhea. A careful history to evaluate medication use,
•AIDS
dietary changes, family history of illnesses, and other
•colon cancerand other bowel tumors symptoms is necessary. Key points in determining the
•endocrine or hormonal abnormalities (thyroid,diabetes seriousness of symptoms are weight loss of over 10 lb
mellitus,etc.) (4.5 kg), blood in the stool, and nocturnal diarrhea
(symptoms that awaken the patient from sleep).
•food allergy
Both prescription and over-the-counter medications
•inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease and
can contain additives,such as lactose and sorbitol,that
ulcerative colitis)
will produce diarrhea in sensitive individuals. Review of
•lactose intolerance allergies or skin changes may also point to a cause.
Social history may indicate if stressis playing a role or
•malabsorption syndromes (celiac and Whipple’s dis-
identify activities which can be associated with diarrhea
ease)
(for example,diarrhea that occurs in runners).
•other (alcohol,microscopic colitis,radiation,surgery)
A combination of stool,blood,and urine tests may
be needed in the evaluation of chronic diarrhea; in addi-
Complications
tion a number of endoscopic and x-ray studies are fre-
The major effects of diarrhea are dehydration,mal- quently required.
nutrition,and weight loss. Signs of dehydration can be
hard to notice,but increasing thirst,dry mouth,weak-
Treatment
ness or lightheadedness (particularly if worsening on
standing),or a darkening/decrease in urination are sug- Treatment is ideally directed toward correcting the
gestive. Severe dehydration leads to changes in the cause; however,the first aim should be to prevent or treat
body’s chemistry and could become life-threatening. dehydration and nutritional deficiencies. The type of
Dehydration from diarrhea can result in kidney failure, fluid and nutrient replacement will depend on whether
neurological symptoms,arthritis,and skin problems. oral feedings can be taken and the severity of fluid loss-
1066 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aehrraiD
es. Oral rehydration solution (ORS) or intravenous fluids
are the choices; ORS is preferred if possible. KEY TERMS
A physician should be notified if the patient is dehy-
drated, and if oral replacement is suggested then com- Anti-motiltiy medications—Medications such as
mercial (Pedialyte and others) or homemade preparations loperamide (Imodium), diphenoxylate (Lomotil),
can be used. The World Health Organization (WHO) has or medications containing codeine or narcotics
provided this easy recipe for home preparation, which that decrease the ability of the intestine to con-
can be taken in small frequent sips: tract. These can worsen the condition of a patient
with dysentery or colitis.
•Table salt—3/4 tsp
Colitis—Inflammation of the colon.
•Baking powder—1 tsp
Endoscope—An endoscope, as used in the field of
•Orange juice—1 c gastroenterology, is a thin flexible tube that uses a
•Water—1 qt (1 L) lens or miniature camera to view various areas of
the gastrointestinal tract. Both diagnosis, through
When feasible,food intake should be continued even
biopsies or other means, and therapeutic proce-
in those with acute diarrhea. A physician should be con-
dures can be done with this instrument.
sulted as to what type and how much food is permitted.
Endoscopy—The performance of an exam using
Anti-motility agents (loperamide, diphenoxylate)
an endoscope is known generally as endoscopy.
are useful for those with chronic symptoms; their use is
Lactose intolerance—An inability to properly
limited or even contraindicated in most individuals with
digest milk and dairy products.
acute diarrhea, especially in those with high fever or
bloody bowel movements. They should not be taken Oral rehydration solution (ORS)—A liquid prepa-
without the advice of a physician. ration developed by the World Health Organiza-
tion that can decrease fluid loss in persons with
Other treatments are available, depending on the
diarrhea. Originally developed to be prepared
cause of symptoms. For example,the bulk agent psylli-
with materials available in the home, commercial
um helps some patients by absorbing excess fluid and
preparations have recently come into use.
solidifying stools; cholestyramine, which binds bile
acids,is effective in treating bile salt induced diarrhea. Steatorrhea—Excessive amounts of fat in the feces.
Low fat diets or more easily digestible fat is useful in
some patients. New antidiarrheal drugsthat decrease
excessive secretion of fluid by the intestinal tract is
another approach for some diseases. Avoidance of med- Nutrient replacement also plays a role in preventing
ications or other products that are known to cause diar- and treating episodes of diarrhea. Zinc especially appears
rhea (such as lactose) is curative in some,but should be to have an effect on the immune system,and deficiency
discussed with a physician. of this mineral can lead to chronic diarrhea. Also,zinc
replacement improves growth in young patients. Plenty
of fluids,especially water,should be taken by individuals
Alternative treatment suffering from diarrhea to prevent dehydration. The
BRAT diet also can be useful in helping to resolve diar-
It is especially important to find the cause of diar-
rhea. This diet limits food intake to bananas,rice,apple-
rhea,since stopping diarrhea when it is the body’s way of
sauce,and toast. These foods provide soluble and insolu-
eliminating something foreign is not helpful and can be
ble fiber without irritation. If the toast is slightly burnt,
harmful in the long run.
the charcoal can help sequester toxins and pull them
One effective alternative approach to preventing and from the body.
treating diarrhea involves oral supplementation of
Acute homeopathic remedies can be very effective for
aspects of the normal flora in the colon with the yeasts
treating diarrhea especially in infants and young children.
Lactobacillus acidophilus,L. bifidus,or Saccharomyces
boulardii. In clinical settings, these “biotherapeutic”
agents have repeatedly been helpful in the resolution of
Prognosis
diarrhea,especially antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Their
effectiveness is also supported by the results of a Prognosis is related to the cause of the diarrhea; for
research study published in the Journal of the American most individuals in developed countries,a bout of acute,
Medical Associationin 1996. infectious diarrhea is at best uncomfortable. However,in
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1067
Diarrhea
both industrialized and developing areas,serious compli- ORGANIZATIONS
cations and deathcan occur. World Health Organization,Division of Emerging and Other
Communicable Diseases Surveillance and Control.
For those with chronic symptoms,an extensive num-
Avenue Appia 20,1211 Geneva 27,Switzerland. (+00 41
ber of tests are usually necessary to make a proper diag-
22) 791 21 11. <http://www.who.int>.
nosis and begin treatment; a specific diagnosis is found
in 90% of patients. In some,however,no specific cause OTHER
is found and only treatment with bulk agents or anti- “Directory of Digestive Diseases Organizations for Patients.”
motility agents is indicated. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Disease.<http://www.niddk.nih.gov>.
“A Neglected Modality for the Treatment and Prevention of
Prevention Selected Intestinal and Vaginal Infections.”JAMA.<http://
pubs.ama-assn.org>.
Proper hygiene and food handling techniques will
Selected publications and documents on diarrhoeal diseases
prevent many cases. Traveler’s diarrhea can be avoided
(including cholera). World Health Organization (WHO).
by use of Pepto-Bismol and/or antibiotics,if necessary.
<http://www.who.ch/chd/pub/cdd/cddpub.htm>.
The most important action is to prevent the complica-
tions of dehydration.
David Kaminstein,MD
Resources Diazep see Benzodiazepines
BOOKS Diclofenac see Nonsteroidal anti-
Fine,Kenneth D. “Diarrhea.”In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gas-
inflammatory drugs
trointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feldman,et al.
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997. Dicyclomine see Antispasmodic drugs
Friedman,Lawrence S.,and Kurt J. Isselbacher. “Diarrhea.”In
Didanosine see Antiretroviral drugs
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony
S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Hamer,Davidson H.,and Sherwood L. Gorbach. “Treatment of
Infectious Diarrhea.”In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gas-
trointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feldman,et al.
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Company. 1997.
Diets
Thielman,Nathan M.,and Richard L. Guerrant. “Food-Borne
Illness.”In Conn’s Current Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E.
Definition
Rakel. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Wolfe,Martin S. “Acute Infectious Diarrhea.”In Conn’s Cur- Humans may alter their usual eating habits for many
rent Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia:W.
reasons, including weight loss, disease prevention or
B. Saunders Co.,1996.
treatment,removing toxins from the body,or to achieve a
PERIODICALS general improvement in physical and mental health. Oth-
Donowitz,Mark,Freddy T. Kokke,and Roxan Saidi. “Evalua- ers adopt special diets for religious reasons. In the case
tion of Patients with Chronic Diarrhea.”New England of some vegetarians and vegans, dietary changes are
Journal of Medicine332 (16 Mar. 1995):725-729. made out of ethical concerns for the rights of animals.
Dupont,Herbert L.,and The Practice Parameters Committee of
the American College of Gastroenterology. “Guidelines
on Acute Infectious Diarrhea in Adults.”American Jour- Purpose
nal of Gastroenterology92 (1997):1962-1975.
People who are moderately to severely overweight
Fekety,Robert. “Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Manage-
can derive substantial health benefits from a weight-loss
ment of Clostridium Difficile-Associated Diarrhea and
diet. A weight reduction of just 10–20 (4.5–9.1 kg) can
Colitis.”American Journal of Gastroenterology92
(1997):739-750. result in reduced cholesterol levels and lower blood pres-
Gianella,Ralph A. “Acute Infectious Diarrhea.”Gastroenterol- sure. Weight-related health problems include heart dis-
ogy Clinics of North America(Sept. 1993):483-707. ease, diabetes, high blood pressure, and high levels of
Penny,Mary E.,and Claudio F. Lanata. “Zinc in the Manage- blood sugar and cholesterol.
ment of Diarrhea in Young Children.”New England Jour-
In individuals who are not overweight, dietary
nal of Medicine333 (28 Sept. 1995):873-874.
changes may also be useful in the prevention or treat-
“Traveler’s Diarrhea:Don’t Let It Ruin Your Trip.”Mayo Clin-
ment of a range of ailments including acquired immun-
ic Health Letter(Jan. 1997).
“When Microbes Are on the Menu.”Harvard Health Letter odeficiency syndrome (AIDS), cancer, osteoporosis,
(Dec. 1994):4-5. inflammatory bowel disease,chronic pulmonary disease,
1068 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
steiD
renal disease, Parkinson’s disease, seizure disorders, ous they are virtually uncountable. These diets employ a
and food allergiesand intolerances. variety of approaches,including the following:
•Fixed-menu:Offers little choice to the dieter. Specifies
Description exactly which foods will be consumed. Easy to follow,
but may be considered “boring”to some dieters.
Origins
•Formula:Replaces some or all meals with a nutritional-
The practice of altering diet for special reasons
ly balanced liquid formula or powder.
has existed since antiquity. For example,Judaism has
included numerous dietary restrictions for thousands •Exchange-type:Allows the dieter to choose between
of years. One ancient Jewish sect,the Essenes,is said selected foods from each food group.
to have developed a primitive detoxification diet
•Flexible:Doesn’t concern itself with the overall diet,
aimed at preparing the bodies,minds,and spirits of its
simply with one aspect such as fat or energy.
members for the coming of a “messiah” who would
deliver them from their Roman captors. Preventative Diets may also be classified according to the types
and therapeutic diets became quite popular during the of foods they allow. For example, an omnivorous diet
late twentieth century. Books promoting the latest consists of both animal and plant foods,whereas a lacto-
dietary plan continue to make the bestseller lists, ovo-vegetarian diet permits no animal flesh, but does
although not all of the information given is considered include eggs,milk,and dairy products. A vegan diet is a
authoritative. stricter form of vegetarianism in which eggs, cheese,
and other milk products are prohibited.
The idea of a healthful diet is to provide all of the
calories and nutrients needed by the body for optimal A third way of classifying diets is according to their
performance, at the same time ensuring that neither purpose:religious,weight-loss,detoxification,lifestyle-
nutritional deficiencies nor excesses occur. Diet plans related,or aimed at prevention or treatment of a specific
that claim to accomplish those objectives are so numer- disease.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1069
Diets
Fats, oils, sweets
(use sparingly)
Milk, yogurt, cheese Meat, poultry, fish,
(2–3 servings MILK eggs, beans, nuts
per day) (2–3) servings per day)
Vegetables
Fruits
(3–5 servings
(2–4 servings
per day)
per day)
Cereal
Bread
Bread, rice, cereal, pasta
(6–11 servings per day)
Suggested daily food servings.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
Precautions is essential to life,and improper nutritioncan result in
serious illness or death.
Dieters should be cautious about plans that severely
restrict the size of food portions,or that eliminate entire
Research and general acceptance
food groups from the diet. It is highly probable that they
will become discouraged and drop out of such programs. It is agreed among traditional and complementary
The best diet is one that can be maintained indefinitely practitioners that many patients could substantially bene-
without ill effects,that offers sufficient variety and bal- fit from improved eating habits. Specialized diets have
ance to provide everything needed for good health,and proved effective against a wide variety of conditions and
that is considerate of personal food preferences. diseases. However,dozens of unproved but widely publi-
cized “fad diets” emerge each year, prompting wide-
Low-fat diets are not recommended for children
spread concerns about their usefulness,cost to the con-
under the age of two. Young children need extra fat to
sumer,and their safety.
maintain their active,growing bodies. Fat intake may be
gradually reduced between the ages of two and five,after
Resources
which it should be limited to a maximum of 30% of total
calories through adulthood. Saturated fat should be ORGANIZATIONS
restricted to no more than 10% of total calories. American Dietetic Association. 216 West Jackson Blvd.,
Chicago,IL 60606-6995. (312) 899-0040. <http://www.
Weight-loss dieters should be wary of the “yo-yo”
eatright.org>.
effect that occurs when numerous attempts are made to
reduce weight using high-risk,quick-fix diets. This con- David Helwig
tinued “cycling” between weight loss and weight gain
can slow the basal metabolic rate and can sometimes lead
to eating disorders. The dieter may become discouraged
and frustrated by this success/failure cycle. The end
result of “yo-yo”dieting is that it becomes more difficult Diffuse esophageal spasm
to maintain a healthy weight.
Definition
Caution should also be exercised about weight-loss
diets that require continued purchases of special prepack- Diffuse esophageal spasm is a term used to define an
aged foods. Not only do these tend to be costly and over- uncoordinated or spastic esophagus.
processed,they may also prevent dieters from learning
the food-selection and preparation skills essential to Description
maintenance of weight loss. Further,dieters should con-
The esophagus is a muscular tube that actively trans-
sider whether they want to carry these special foods to
ports food from the throat to the stomach by rhythmic
work,restaurants,or homes of friends.
contractions known as peristalsis. The actual mechanism
Concern has been expressed about weight-loss diet and anatomy are quite complex,involving three distinct
plans that do not include exercise,considered essential segments and allowing a person to swallow even when
to long-term weight management. Some diets and sup- upside-down. Diffuse esophageal spasm describes a con-
plements may be inadvisable for patients with special dition where the entire esophagus is spastic—along its
conditions or situations. entire length, the muscular activity is increased and
uncoordinated. The name corkscrew esophagus describes
Certain fad diets purporting to be official diets of
perfectly the appearance of this disorder on x rays.
groups such as the American Heart Association and the
Mayo Clinic are in no way endorsed by those institu- X rays may reveal a slightly different appearance
tions. Patients thinking of starting such a diet should and result in the designation rosary bead esophagus,but
check with the institution to ensure its name has not been the cause is still diffuse spasm, and the two entities
misappropriated by an unscrupulous practitioner. behave in the same way.
Causes and symptoms
Side effects
The cause appears to be disruption of the complex
A wide range of side effects (some quite serious) can system of nerves that coordinates the muscular activity.
result from special diets,especially those that are nutri- The result is difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) and pain
tionally unbalanced. Further problems can arise if the that feels like a heart attackand can involve the entire
dieter is taking high doses of dietary supplements. Food chest,jaw,and arms.
1070 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
msaps
laegahpose
esuffiD
Clouse,Ray E. “Motor disorders of the esophagus.”In Sleisenger
KEY TERMS & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark
Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
Goyal,Raj K. “Diseases of the Esophagus.”In Harrison’s
Contrast agent—A substance that produces shad-
Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et
ows on x rays.
al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Manometry—Measurement of pressure.
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
Peristalsis—Slow, rhythmic contractions of the
muscles in a tubular organ, such as the intestines,
that propel the contents along.
DiGeorge syndrome
Diagnosis Definition
Swallowing problems usually call for esopha- DiGeorge syndrome (also called congenital thymic
gograms. In the x ray department,the patient is given a hypoplasia, or third and fourth pharyngeal pouch syn-
contrast agent to drink. During swallowing,x rays record drome) is a birth defect that is caused by an abnormal
the passage of the agent down the esophagus and into the chromosome and affects the baby’s immune system. The
stomach. Instead of a straight tube with well-coordinated syndrome is marked by absence or underdevelopment of
waves of contraction, the resulting x rays show a the thymus and parathyroid glands. It is named for the
writhing organ resembling a giant corkscrew. pediatrician who first described it in 1965.
Another test that is used in many disorders of
esophageal motility is manometry. Pressures inside the Description
esophagus are measured every inch or so using a balloon
The prevalence of DiGeorge syndrome is debated;
device that is passed all the way down to the stomach.
the estimates range from 1:4000 to 1:6395. Because
The result is a precise record of its activity that yields a
the symptoms caused by the chromosomal abnormality
specific diagnosis.
vary somewhat from patient to patient, the syndrome
probably occurs much more often than was previously
Treatment thought. DiGeorge syndrome is sometimes described
as one of the “CATCH 22” disorders, so named
Soft and liquid foods pass more easily than solid
because of their characteristics—cardiac defects,
pieces. Medications of several types are helpful—
abnormal facial features, thymus underdevelopment,
nifedipine,hydralazine,isoproterenol,and nitrates being
cleft palate,and hypocalcemia—caused by a deletion
the most successful. Several other treatments have uncer-
of several genes in chromosome 22. The specific facial
tain results. For severe cases,relief is obtained two-thirds
features associated with DiGeorge syndrome include
of the time by cutting the muscles along the entire length
low-set ears, wide-set eyes, a small jaw, and a short
of the esophagus. This is a major surgical procedure.
groove in the upper lip. The male/female ratio is 1:1.
The syndrome appears to be equally common in all
racial and ethnic groups.
Prognosis
This condition does not go away, nor is treatment
Causes and symptoms
entirely satisfactory. Patients need to be careful of what
DiGeorge syndrome is caused either by inheritance
they eat and continue on medication if a beneficial one is
of a defective chromosome 22 or by a new defect in chro-
found. Fortunately,the condition does not get progres-
mosome 22 in the fetus. The type of defect that is
sively worse as time passes.
involved is called deletion. A deletion occurs when the
genetic material in the chromosomes does not recombine
Resources properly during the formation of sperm or egg cells. The
deletion means that several genes from chromosome 22
BOOKS
are missing in DiGeorge syndrome patients. According
Bennett,J. Claude,and Fred Plum,eds. Cecil Textbook of Med-
to a 1999 study,6% of children with DiGeorge syndrome
icine.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed. inherited the deletion from a parent, while 94% had a
Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1995. new deletion. Other conditions that are associated with
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1071
DiGeorge
syndrome
DiGeorge syndrome are diabetes (a condition where the Defective immune function
pancreas no longer produces enough insulin) in the
Children with DiGeorge syndrome should be kept
mother and fetal alcohol syndrome(a pattern of birth
on low-phosphorus dietsand kept away from crowds or
defectsand learning and behavioral problems affecting
other sources of infection. They should not be immu-
individuals whose mothers consumed alcohol during
nized with vaccines made from live viruses or given cor-
pregnancy).
ticosteroids.
The loss of the genes in the deleted material means
that the baby’s third and fourth pharyngeal pouches fail
Prognosis
to develop normally during the twelfth week of pregnan-
The prognosis is variable; many infants with DiGe-
cy. This developmental failure results in a completely or
orge syndrome die from overwhelming infection,
partially absent thymus gland and parathyroid glands. In
seizures,or heart failure within the first year. Advances
addition,74% of fetuses with DiGeorge syndrome have
in heart surgery indicate that the prognosis is most close-
severe heart defects. The child is born with a defective
ly linked to the severity of the heart defects and the par-
immune system and an abnormally low level of calcium
tial presence of the thymus gland. In most children who
in the blood.
survive,the number of T cells,a type of white blood cell,
These defects usually become apparent within 48
in the blood rises spontaneously as they mature. Sur-
hours of birth. The infant’s heart defects may lead to heart
vivors are likely to be mentally retarded,however,and to
failure,or there may be seizures and other evidence of a
have other developmental difficulties,including psychi-
low level of calcium in the blood (hypocalcemia).
atric problems in later life.
Diagnosis
Prevention
Diagnosis of DiGeorge syndrome can be made by
Genetic counselingis recommended for parents of
ultrasound examination around the eighteenth week of
children with DiGeorge syndrome because the disorder
pregnancy,when abnormalities in the development of the
can be detected prior to birth. Although most children
heart or the palate can be detected. Another technique
with DiGeorge syndrome did not inherit the chromosome
that is used to diagnose the syndrome before birth is
deletion from their parents,they have a 50% chance of
called fluorescence in situ hybridization,or FISH. This
passing the deletion on to their own children.
technique uses DNA probes from the DiGeorge region
Because of the association between DiGeorge syn-
on chromosome 22. FISH can be performed on cell sam-
drome and fetal alcohol syndrome, pregnant women
ples obtained by amniocentesisas early as the fourteenth
should avoid drinking alcoholic beverages.
week of pregnancy. It confirms about 95% of cases of
DiGeorge syndrome.
Resources
If the mother has not had prenatal testing,the diag-
nosis of DiGeorge syndrome is sometimes suggested by BOOKS
“Common Multiple Congenital Anomaly Syndromes.”In
the child’s facial features at birth. In other cases,the doc-
Neonatology:Management,Procedures,On-Call Prob-
tor makes the diagnosis during heart surgery when he or
lems,Diseases and Drugs,ed. Tricia Lacy Gomella,et al.
she notices the absence or abnormal location of the thy-
Norwalk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1994.
mus gland. The diagnosis can be confirmed by blood
“DiGeorge Syndrome.”In Physicians’Guide to Rare Diseases,
tests for calcium,phosphorus,and parathyroid hormone
ed. Jess G. Thoene. Montvale,NJ:Dowden Publishing
levels,and by the sheep cell test for immune function. Company,Inc.,1995.
“Immunology; Allergic Disorders:Immunodeficiency Dis-
Treatment eases.”In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy,
ed. Robert Berkow,et al. Rahway,NJ:Merck Research
Hypocalcemia
Laboratories,1999.
Hypocalcemia in DiGeorge patients is unusually dif- McDonald-McGinn,Donna M.,et al. 22q11 Deletion Syn-
drome.Philadelphia:The Children’s Hospital of Philadel-
ficult to treat. Infants are usually given calcium and vita-
phia,1999.
min D by mouth. Severe cases have been treated by
Sujansky,Eva,et al. “Genetics & Dysmorphology.”In Current
transplantation of fetal thymus tissue or bone marrow.
Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment,ed. William W. Hay Jr.,
et al. Stamford,CT:Appleton & Lange,1997.
Heart defects
ORGANIZATIONS
Infants with life-threatening heart defects are treated Canadian 22q Group. 320 Cote Street Antoine,West Montreal,
surgically. Quebec H3Y 2J4.
1072 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
egroeGiD
These medicines help make the heart stronger and more
KEY TERMS efficient. This, in turn, improves blood circulation and
helps relieve the swelling of the hands and ankles that is
Deletion—A genetic abnormality in which a seg- common in people with heart problems.
ment of a chromosome is lost. DiGeorge syn-
drome is caused by a deletion on human chromo- Description
some 22.
Digitalis drugs,also known as digitalis glycosides,
Fetal alcohol syndrome—A cluster of birth defects
are available only with a physician’s prescription. They
that includes abnormal facial features and mental
are sold in tablet,capsule,liquid,and injectable forms.
retardation, caused by the mother’s consumption
Commonly used digitalis drugs are digitoxin (Crystodi-
of alcoholic beverages during pregnancy.
gin) and digoxin (Lanoxin).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)—A tech-
nique for diagnosing DiGeorge syndrome before
Recommended dosage
birth by analyzing cells obtained by amniocentesis
with DNA probes. FISH is about 95% accurate. The recommended dosage is different for each
patient. The physician who prescribes the medicine will
Hypocalcemia—An abnormally low level of calci-
determine the correct dose. Taking exactly the right
um in the blood.
amount of medicine and taking it exactly as directed are
Hypoplasia—A deficiency or underdevelopment
very important. Never take larger or more frequent doses.
of a tissue or body structure.
During treatment with a digitalis heart medicine, the
T cells—A type of white blood cell produced in physician will monitor blood levels of the drug and will
the thymus gland. T cells are an important part of decide whether the dose needs to be changed. Patients
the immune system. Infants born with an underde- should never change the dose of this medicine unless told
veloped or absent thymus do not have a normal to do so by their physicians.
level of T cells in their blood.
Precautions
Seeing a physician regularly while taking digitalis
Chromosome Deletion Outreach,Inc. P.O. Box 724,Boca drugs is very important. The physician will check to
Raton,FL 33429-0724. (888) 236-6680. make sure the medicine is working as it should and will
International DiGeorge/VCF Support Network,c/o Family make any necessary changes in dosage or in instructions
Voices of New York. 46 1/2 Clinton Avenue,Cortland,NY
for taking the medicine.
13045. (607) 753-1250.
Patients taking digitalis drugs should learn to take
Rebecca J. Frey,PhD their pulse and should check it regularly while under
treatment with this medicine. Changes in pulse rate,
Digital rectal examination see Rectal rhythm,or force could be signs of side effects.
examination Do not stop taking this medicine suddenly without
checking with the physician who prescribed it. This
could cause a serious change in heart function.
Digitalis drugs are responsible for many accidental
poisonings in children. Keep this medicine out of the
Digitalis drugs reach of children.
Be alert to the signs of overdose. Overdosing is a
Definition
serious concern with digitalis drugs,because the amount
Digitalis drugs are medicines made from a type of of medicine that most people need to help their heart
foxglove plant (Digitalis purpurea) that have a stimulat- problems is very close to the amount that can cause prob-
ing effect on the heart. lems from overdose. If any of these signs of overdose
occur,check with a physician as soon as possible:
Purpose •loss of appetite
•nausea
Digitalis drugs are used to treat heart problems such
as congestive heart failure and irregular heartbeat. •vomiting
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1073
Digitalis
drugs
looks similar. Patients who are taking other medicines
that look like their digitalis medicine should ask their
pharmacists for suggestions on how to avoid mix-ups.
Anyone who has had unusual reactions to digitalis
drugs in the past should let his or her physician know
before taking the drugs again. The physician should also
be told about any allergiesto foods,dyes,preservatives,
or other substances.
Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding or who
may become pregnant should check with their physicians
before using digitalis drugs.
Older people may be especially sensitive to the
effects of digitalis drugs,which may increase the chance
of overdose.
Before using digitalis drugs,people with any of the
following medical problems should make sure their
physicians are aware of their conditions:
•heart disease
•heart rhythm problems
•severe lung disease
•kidney disease
•liver disease
•thyroid disease
Side effects
Side effects are rare with this medicine. Check with
a physician as soon as possible if a skin rash,hives,or
any other unusual or troublesome symptoms occur.
Watch for signs of overdose.
•pain in the lower stomach
•diarrhea Interactions
•extreme tiredness or weakness Digitalis drugs may interact with a number of other
•extremely slow or irregular heartbeat (or fast heartbeat medicines. When this happens,the effects of one or both
in children) of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects may
be greater. For example:
•blurred vision or other vision changes
•Taking digitalis drugs with other heart medicines,
•drowsiness
amphetamines,or diet pills could increase the risk of
•confusion or depression
heart rhythm problems.
•headache
•Calcium channel blockers, used to treat high blood
•fainting pressure,may cause higher than usual levels of digitalis
drugs in the body that could lead to symptoms of over-
Anyone who is taking digitalis drugs should be sure
dose as covered in the above section.
to tell the health care professional in charge before hav-
ing any surgical or dental procedures or receiving emer- •Diuretics (water pills) or other medicines that lower the
gency treatment. Physicians may advise people taking amount of potassium in the body may increase the side
digitalis drugs to wear or carry medical identification effects of digitalis drugs.
indicating that they are taking this medicine.
•Medicines that increase the amount of potassium in the
Patients need to be very careful not to accidentally body may raise the risk of serious heart rhythm prob-
take this medicine in place of another medicine that lems when taken with digitalis drugs.
1074 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sgurd
silatigiD
Digitalis purpurea.(Photo Researcher, Inc.Reproduced by
permission.)
•Diarrhea medicine or cholesterol-lowering drugs such as
cholestyramine (Questran) and colestipol (Colestid) may
keep digitalis medicines from being absorbed into the
body. To prevent this problem,digitalis drugs should be
taken several hours before or after taking these medicines.
The list above does not include every drug that may
interact with digitalis drugs. Be sure to check with a
physician or pharmacist before taking any other prescrip-
tion or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine.
In addition, a diet high in fiber may interfere with
the effects of digitalis drugs by preventing the medicine
from being absorbed into the body. To avoid this prob-
lem,eat high fiber foods (such as bran products,whole
wheat bread, and fresh fruits and vegetables) several
hours before or after taking digitalis medicine.
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
Digoxin see Digitalis drugs; Antiarrhythmic
drugs
Dilatation and curettage
Definition
Dilatation and curettage (D & C) is a gynecological
procedure in which the lining of the uterus (endometri-
um) is scraped away.
Purpose
D & C is commonly used to obtain tissue for micro-
scopic evaluation to rule out cancer. D & C may also be
used to diagnose and treat heavy menstrual bleeding,and
to diagnose endometrial polyps and uterine fibroids. A
D & C can be used as a treatment as well, to remove
pregnancytissue after a miscarriage,incomplete abor-
tion,or childbirth. Endometrial polyps may be removed,
and sometimes benign uterine tumors (fibroids) may be
scraped away. D & C can also be used as an early abor-
tion technique up to 16 weeks.
Description
D & C is usually performed under general anesthe-
sia, although local or epidural anesthesia can also be
used. A local lessens risk and costs,but the woman will
feel cramping during the procedure. The type of anesthe-
sia used often depends upon the reason for the D & C.
In the procedure (which takes only minutes to per-
form),the doctor inserts an instrument to hold open the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1075
Dilatation
and
curettage
Uterus
Cervix
Vagina
Dilator
Figure A
Curette
Figure B
When performing a D & C,the physician inserts a speculum
to separate and hold the vaginal walls,then stretches open
the cervix with a dilator.Once the cervix is dilated,the
physician will insert a curette into the uterus and scrapes
away small portions of the uterine lining for laboratory
analysis.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
vent infection while the cervix is closing and to allow the
KEY TERMS endometrium to heal completely.
Endometrial polyps—A growth in the lining of the Risks
uterus (endometrium) that may cause bleeding
The primary risk after the procedure is infection.
and can develop into cancer.
Signs of infection include:
Epidural anesthesia—A type of anesthesia that is
•fever
injected into the epidural space of the spinal cord
to numb the nerves leading to the lower half of the •heavy bleeding
body.
•severe cramps
Uterine fibroid—A noncancerous tumor of the
•foul-smelling vaginal discharge
uterus that can range from the size of a pea to the
size of a grapefruit. Small fibroids require no treat- A woman should report any of these symptoms to
ment, but those causing serious symptoms may her doctor,who can treat the infection with antibiotics
need to be removed. before it becomes serious.
D & C is a surgical operation,which carries certain
risks associated with general anesthesia. Rare complica-
tions include puncture of the uterus (which usually heals
vaginal walls, and then stretches the opening of the on its own) or puncture of the bowel or bladder (which
uterus to the vagina (the cervix) by inserting a series of require further surgery to repair).
tapering rods,each thicker than the previous one,or by
using other specialized instruments. This process of
Normal results
opening the cervix is called dilation.
Once the cervix is dilated, the physician inserts a Removal of the uterine lining causes no side effects,
spoon-shaped surgical device called a curette into the and may be beneficial if the lining has thickened so much
uterus. The curette is used to scrape away the uterine lin- that it causes heavy periods. The uterine lining soon
ing. One or more small tissue samples from the lining of grows again normally,as part of the menstrual cycle.
the uterus or the cervical canal are sent for analysis by
microscope to check for abnormal cells. Resources
Although simpler,less expensive techniques such as BOOKS
a vacuum aspiration are quickly replacing the D & C as a Carlson,Karen J.,Stephanie A. Eisenstat,and Terra Ziporyn.
diagnostic method,it is still often used to diagnose and The Harvard Guide to Women’s Health.Cambridge,MA:
treat a number of conditions. Harvard University Press,1996.
Carol A. Turkington
Preparation
Dilated cardiomyopathy see Congestive
Because opening the cervix can be painful,sedatives
may be given before the procedure begins. Deep breath- cardiomyopathy
ing and other relaxation techniques may help ease
Diltiazem see Calcium channel blockers
cramping during cervical dilation.
Dilution test see Kidney function tests
Aftercare Diphenhydramine see Antihistamines
A woman who has had a D & C performed in a hos-
pital can usually go home the same day or the next day.
Many women experience backache and mild cramps
after the procedure,and may pass small blood clots for a
day or so. Vaginal staining or bleeding may continue for Diphtheria
several weeks.
Definition
Most women can resume normal activities almost
immediately. Patients should avoid sexual intercourse, Diphtheria is a potentially fatal,contagious disease
douching,and tampon use for at least two weeks to pre- that usually involves the nose,throat,and air passages,
1076 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
airehthpiD
but may also infect the skin. Its most striking feature is The signs and symptoms of diphtheria vary accord-
the formation of a grayish membrane covering the tonsils ing to the location of the infection:
and upper part of the throat.
Nasal
Nasal diphtheria produces few symptoms other than
Description
a watery or bloody discharge. On examination,there may
Like many other upper respiratory diseases,diphthe- be a small visible membrane in the nasal passages. Nasal
ria is most likely to break out during the winter months. infection rarely causes complications by itself,but it is a
At one time it was a major childhood killer,but it is now public health problem because it spreads the disease
rare in developed countries because of widespread more rapidly than other forms of diphtheria.
immunization. Since 1988, all confirmed cases in the
United States have involved visitors or immigrants. In Pharyngeal
countries that do not have routine immunization against
Pharyngeal diphtheria gets its name from the phar-
this infection,the mortality rate varies from 1.5–25%.
ynx,which is the part of the upper throat that connects
Persons who have not been immunized may get the mouth and nasal passages with the voice box. This is
diphtheria at any age. The disease is spread most often by the most common form of diphtheria,causing the charac-
droplets from the coughing or sneezing of an infected teristic throat membrane. The membrane often bleeds if
person or carrier. The incubation period is two to seven it is scraped or cut. It is important not to try to remove
days, with an average of three days. It is vital to seek the membrane because the trauma may increase the
medical help at once when diphtheria is suspected, body’s absorption of the exotoxin. Other signs and symp-
because treatment requires emergency measures for toms of pharyngeal diphtheria include mild sore throat,
adults as well as children. fever of 101–102°F (38.3–38.9°C), a rapid pulse, and
general body weakness.
Causes and symptoms
Laryngeal
The symptoms of diphtheria are caused by toxins
Laryngeal diphtheria,which involves the voice box
produced by the diphtheria bacillus, Corynebacterium
or larynx, is the form most likely to produce serious
diphtheriae(from the Greek for “rubber membrane”). In
complications. The fever is usually higher in this form of
fact,toxin production is related to infections of the bacil-
diphtheria (103–104°F or 39.4–40°C) and the patient is
lus itself with a particular bacteria virus called a phage
very weak. Patients may have a severe cough,have diffi-
(from bacteriophage; a virus that infects bacteria). The
culty breathing, or lose their voice completely. The
intoxication destroys healthy tissue in the upper area of
development of a “bull neck” indicates a high level of
the throat around the tonsils,or in open woundsin the
exotoxin in the bloodstream. Obstruction of the airway
skin. Fluid from the dying cells then coagulates to form
may result in respiratory compromise and death.
the telltale gray or grayish green membrane. Inside the
membrane,the bacteria produce an exotoxin,which is a
Skin
poisonous secretion that causes the life-threatening
symptoms of diphtheria. The exotoxin is carried through- This form of diphtheria,which is sometimes called
out the body in the bloodstream,destroying healthy tis- cutaneous diphtheria,accounts for about 33% of diphthe-
sue in other parts of the body. ria cases. It is found chiefly among people with poor
The most serious complications caused by the exo- hygiene. Any break in the skin can become infected with
toxin are inflammations of the heart muscle (myocardi- diphtheria. The infected tissue develops an ulcerated area
tis) and damage to the nervous system. The risk of seri- and a diphtheria membrane may form over the wound but
ous complications is increased as the time between onset is not always present. The wound or ulcer is slow to heal
of symptoms and the administration of antitoxin increas- and may be numb or insensitive when touched.
es, and as the size of the membrane formed increases.
The myocarditis may cause disturbances in the heart Diagnosis
rhythm and may culminate in heart failure. The symp-
Because diphtheria must be treated as quickly as
toms of nervous system involvement can include seeing
possible,doctors usually make the diagnosis on the basis
double (diplopia), painful or difficult swallowing, and
of the visible symptoms without waiting for test results.
slurred speech or loss of voice,which are all indications
of the exotoxin’s effect on nerve functions. The exotoxin In making the diagnosis, the doctor examines the
may also cause severe swelling in the neck (“bull neck”). patient’s eyes,ears,nose,and throat in order to rule out
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1077
Diphtheria
other diseases that may cause fever and sore throat,such Cutaneous diphtheria is usually treated by cleansing
as infectious mononucleosis,a sinus infection,or strep the wound thoroughly with soap and water,and giving
throat. The most important single symptom that sug- the patient antibiotics for 10 days.
gests diphtheria is the membrane. When a patient devel-
ops skin infections during an outbreak of diphtheria,the Supportive care
doctor will consider the possibility of cutaneous diphthe-
Diphtheria patients need bed rest with intensive
ria and take a smear to confirm the diagnosis.
nursing care, including extra fluids, oxygenation, and
monitoring for possible heart problems,airway blockage,
Laboratory tests
or involvement of the nervous system. Patients with
The diagnosis of diphtheria can be confirmed by the laryngeal diphtheria are kept in a croup tent or high-
results of a culture obtained from the infected area. Mater- humidity environment; they may also need throat suc-
ial from the swab is put on a microscope slide and stained tioning or emergency surgery if their airway is blocked.
using a procedure called Gram’s stain. The diphtheria
Patients recovering from diphtheria should rest at
bacillus is called Gram-positive because it holds the dye
home for a minimum of two to three weeks,especially if
after the slide is rinsed with alcohol. Under the micro-
they have heart complications. In addition, patients
scope,diphtheria bacilli look like beaded rod-shaped cells,
should be immunized against diphtheria after recovery,
grouped in patterns that resemble Chinese characters.
because having the disease does not always induce anti-
Another laboratory test involves growing the diphtheria
toxin formation and protect them from reinfection.
bacillus on a special material called Loeffler’s medium.
Prevention of complications
Treatment
Diphtheria patients who develop myocarditis may be
Diphtheria is a serious disease requiring hospital treated with oxygen and with medications to prevent
treatment in an intensive care unit if the patient has irregular heart rhythms. An artificial pacemaker may be
developed respiratory symptoms. Treatment includes a needed. Patients with difficulty swallowing can be fed
combination of medications and supportive care: through a tube inserted into the stomach through the
nose. Patients who cannot breathe are usually put on
Antitoxin mechanical respirators.
The most important step is prompt administration of
diphtheria antitoxin, without waiting for laboratory Prognosis
results. The antitoxin is made from horse serum and
The prognosis depends on the size and location of
works by neutralizing any circulating exotoxin. The doc-
the membrane and on early treatment with antitoxin; the
tor must first test the patient for sensitivity to animal
longer the delay,the higher the death rate. The most vul-
serum. Patients who are sensitive (about 10%) must be
nerable patients are children under age 15 and those who
desensitized with diluted antitoxin,since the antitoxin is
develop pneumonia or myocarditis. Nasal and cutaneous
the only specific substance that will counteract diphthe-
diphtheria are rarely fatal.
ria exotoxin. No human antitoxin is available for the
treatment of diphtheria.
Prevention
The dose ranges from 20,000–100,000 units,
depending on the severity and length of time of symp- Prevention of diphtheria has four aspects:
toms occurring before treatment. Diphtheria antitoxin is
usually given intravenously. Immunization
Universal immunization is the most effective means
Antibiotics
of preventing diphtheria. The standard course of immu-
Antibiotics are given to wipe out the bacteria, to nization for healthy children is three doses of DPT
prevent the spread of the disease, and to protect the (diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis) preparation given between
patient from developing pneumonia. They are not a sub- two months and six months of age,with booster doses
stitute for treatment with antitoxin. Both adults and chil- given at 18 months and at entry into school. Adults
dren may be given penicillin, ampicillin, or ery- should be immunized at 10 year intervals with Td
thromycin. Erythromycin appears to be more effective (tetanus-diphtheria) toxoid. A toxoid is a bacterial toxin
than penicillin in treating people who are carriers that is treated to make it harmless but still can induce
because of better penetration into the infected area. immunity to the disease.
1078 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
airehthpiD
Resources
KEY TERMS
BOOKS
Abzug,Mark J. “Infectious Diseases:Bacterial,Spirochetal,
Antitoxin—An antibody against an exotoxin, usu- Protozoal,Metazoal,& Mycotic.”In Handbook of Pedi-
ally derived from horse serum. atrics,ed. Gerald B. Merenstein,et al. Norwalk,CT:
Appleton & Lange,1994.
Bacillus—A rod-shaped bacterium, such as the
Chambers,Henry F. “Infectious Diseases:Bacterial & Chlamy-
diphtheria bacterium.
dial.”In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1998.
Carrier—A person who may harbor an organism 37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton
without symptoms and may transmit it to others. & Lange,1997.
“Childhood Infections:Bacterial Infections.”In The Merck
Cutaneous—Located in the skin.
Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.16th ed. Ed. Robert
Diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP)—The standard Berkow. Rahway,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,1992.
preparation used to immunize children against Mirza,Ayesha,and Russell W. Steele. “Diphtheria.”In Conn’s
diphtheria, tetanus, and whooping cough. A so- Current Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia:
called “acellular pertussis” vaccine (aP) is usually W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Ogle,John W. “Infections:Bacterial & Spirochetal.”In Current
used since its release in the mid-1990s.
Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment,ed. William W. Hay Jr.,
Exotoxin—A poisonous secretion produced by et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997.
bacilli which is carried in the bloodstream to other Simoes,Eric A. F.,and Jessie R. Groothuis. “Immunization.”
parts of the body. In Current Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment,ed. William
W. Hay Jr.,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997.
Gram’s stain—A dye staining technique used in
laboratory tests to determine the presence and
Rebecca J. Frey
type of bacteria.
Loeffler’s medium—A special substance used to Diplegia see Paralysis
grow diphtheria bacilli to confirm the diagnosis.
Direct Coombs’ test see Coombs’ tests
Myocarditis—Inflammation of the heart tissue.
Direct laryngoscopy see Laryngoscopy
Toxoid—A preparation made from inactivated
exotoxin, used in immunization.
Isolation of patients
Diphtheria patients must be isolated for one to
seven days or until two successive cultures show that Discoid lupus erythematosus
they are no longer contagious. Children placed in isola-
tionare usually assigned a primary nurse for emotional
Definition
support.
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is a disease in
which coin-shaped (discoid) red bumps appear on the skin.
Identification and treatment of contacts
Because diphtheria is highly contagious and has a
short incubation period,family members and other con-
Description
tacts of diphtheria patients must be watched for symp-
toms and tested to see if they are carriers. They are usual- The disease called discoid lupus erythematosus only
ly given antibiotics for seven days and a booster shot of affects the skin,although similar discoid skin lesionscan
diphtheria/tetanus toxoid. occur in the serious disease called systemic lupus ery-
thematosus(SLE). Only about 10% of all patients with
Reporting cases to public health authorities DLE will go on to develop the multi-organ disease SLE.
Reporting is necessary to track potential epidemics, The tendency to develop DLE seems to run in fami-
to help doctors identify the specific strain of diphtheria, lies. Although men or women of any age can develop
and to see if resistance to penicillin or erythromycin has DLE,it occurs in women three times more frequently than
developed. in men. The typical DLE patient is a woman in her 30s.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1079
Discoid
lupus
erythematosus
reveal the type of antibodies present in SLE,and physical
examinationusually does not reveal anything other than
the skin lesions. If antibodies exist in the blood,or if other
symptoms or physical signs are found,it is possible that
the discoid lesions are a sign of SLE rather than DLE.
Treatment
Treatment of DLE primarily involves the use of a
variety of skin creams. Sunscreensare used for protec-
tion. Steroid creams can be applied to decrease inflamma-
tion. Occasionally,small amounts of a steroid preparation
will be injected with a needle into a specific lesion.
Because of their long list of side effects,steroid prepara-
tions taken by mouth are avoided. Sometimes,short-term
treatment with oral steroids will be used for particularly
severe DLE outbreaks. Medications used to treat the
infectious disease malariaare often used to treat DLE.
Causes and symptoms
The cause of DLE is unknown. It is thought that Alternative treatment
DLE (like SLE) may be an autoimmune disorder.
Alternative treatments for DLE include eating a
Autoimmune disordersare those that occur when cells
healthy diet,low in red meat and dairy products and high
of the immune system are misdirected against the body.
in fish containing omega-3 fatty acids. These types of
Normally, immune cells work to recognize and help
fish include mackerel,sardines,and salmon. Following a
destroy foreign invaders like bacteria,viruses,and fungi.
healthy diet is thought to decrease inflammation. Dietary
In autoimmune disorders,these cells mistakenly recog-
supplements believed to be helpful include vitaminsB,
nize various tissues of the body as foreign invaders,and
C,E,and selenium. Vitamin A is also recommended to
attack and destroy these tissues. In SLE,the misdirected
improve DLE lesions. Constitutional homeopathic treat-
immune cells are antibodies. In DLE,the damaging cells
ment can help heal DLE as well as help prevent it devel-
are believed to be a type of white blood cell called a T
oping into SLE.
lymphocyte. The injury to the skin results in inflamma-
tion and the characteristic discoid lesions.
Prognosis
In DLE,the characteristic skin lesion is circular and
raised. The reddish rash is about 5–10 mm in diameter, For the most part, the prognosis for people with
with the center often somewhat scaly and lighter in color DLE is excellent. While the lesions may be cosmetically
than the darker outer ring. The surface of these lesions is unsightly,they are not life threatening and usually do not
sometimes described as “warty.”There is rarely any itch- cause a patient to change his or her lifestyle. Only about
ingor painassociated with discoid lesions. They tend to 10% of patients with DLE will go on to develop SLE.
appear on the face, ears, neck, scalp, chest, back, and
arms. As DLE lesions heal,they leave thickened,scarred
Prevention
areas of skin. When the scalp is severely affected,there
may be associated hair loss (alopecia). DLE cannot be prevented. Recommendations to pre-
vent flares of DLE in patients with the disease include
People with DLE tend to be quite sensitive to the
avoiding exposure to sun and consistently using sun-
sun. They are more likely to get a sunburn,and the sun
screen.
is likely to worsen their discoid lesions.
Resources
Diagnosis
BOOKS
Diagnosis of DLE usually requires a skin biopsy. A
Aaseng,Nathan. Autoimmune Diseases.New York:F. Watts,
small sample of a discoid lesion is removed, specially
1995.
prepared,and examined under a microscope. Usually,the
Hahn,Bevra Hannahs. “Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.”In
lesion has certain microscopic characteristics that allow it Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony
to be identified as a DLE lesion. Blood tests will not S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
1080 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
susotamehtyre
supul
diocsiD
Discoloration of the hands is one characteristic of discoid
lupus erythematosus.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Repro-
duced by permission.)
disk is performed to treat back painthat has lasted at least
KEY TERMS six weeks as a result of an abnormal disk and that has not
responded to conservative treatment. Surgery is also per-
Antibody—Specialized cells of the immune sys- formed if there is pressure on the lumbosacral nerve roots
tem that can recognize organisms invading the that causes weakness or bowel or bladder disfunction.
body (like bacteria, viruses, and fungi). The anti- As a person ages, the disks between the vertebrae
bodies are then able to start a complex chain of degenerate and dry out, and the fibers holding them in
events designed to kill these foreign invaders. place tear. Eventually, the disk can form a blister-like
Autoimmune disorder—A disorder in which the bulge,compressing nerves in the spine and causing pain.
body’s antibodies mistake the body’s own tissues This is called a “prolapsed”(or herniated) disk. If such a
for foreign invaders. The immune system then disk causes muscle weakness or interferes with bladder
attacks and causes damage to these tissues. or bowel function because it is pressing on a nerve root,
immediate surgery to remove the disk may be needed.
Immune system—The system of specialized organs,
lymph nodes, and blood cells throughout the body The aim of the surgery is to try to relieve all pressure
that work together to defend the body against for- on nerve roots by removing the pulpy material from the
eign invaders (bacteria, viruses, fungi, etc.). disk,or the disk itself. If it is necessary to remove materi-
al from several nearby vertebrae,the spine may become
unsteady. In this case,the surgeon will perform a spinal
fusion,removing all the disks between two or more verte-
Long,James W. The Essential Guide to Chronic Illness.New brae and roughening the bones so that the vertebrae heal
York:HarperPerennial,1997. together. Bone strips taken from the patient’s leg or hip
Wallace,Daniel J. The Lupus Book.New York:Oxford Univer- may be used to help hold the vertebrae together. Spinal
sity Press,1995.
fusion decreases pain but it also decreases spinal mobility.
PERIODICALS
Mann,Judy. “The Harsh Realities of Lupus.”The Washington
Precautions
Post,120,no. 281 (8 Oct. 1997):C12.
Umansky,Diane. “Living with Lupus.”American Health for The doctor will obtain x rays,neuroimaging stud-
Women16,no. 5 (June 1997):92+. ies, including computed tomography scan (CT scan)
ORGANIZATIONS myelogram and magnetic resonance imaging(MRI),
The American College of Rheumatology. 1800 Century Place, and clinical exams to determine the precise location of
Suite 250,Atlanta,GA 30345. (404) 633-3777. <http:// the affected disk.
www.rheumatology.org>.
Lupus Foundation of America. 1300 Piccard Dr.,Suite 200,
Rockville,MD 20850. (800) 558-0121. <http://www. Description
lupus.org>.
The surgery is done under general anaesthesia,
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD which puts the patient to sleep and affects the whole
body. Operating on the patient’s back,the neurosurgeon
or orthopedic surgeon makes an opening into the verte-
bral canal, and then moves the dura and the bundle of
Disk removal nerves called the “cauda equina” (horse’s tail) aside,
which exposes the disk. If a portion of the disk has
Definition moved from between the vertebrae out into the nerve
canal,it is simply removed. If the disk itself has become
One of the most common types of back surgery is
fragmented and partially displaced, or not fragmented
disk removal (diskectomy),the removal of an interverte-
but bulging extensively, the surgeon will remove the
bral disk,the flexible plate that connects any two adja-
bulging or displaced part of the disk and the part that lies
cent vertebrae in the spine. Intervertebral disks act as
in the space between the vertebrae.
shock absorbers, protecting the brain and spinal cord
from the impact produced by the body’s movements.
Preparation
Purpose
The patient is given an injection an hour before the
About 150,000 Americans undergo disk removal surgery to dry up internal fluids and encourage drowsi-
each year in the United States. Removing the invertebral ness.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1081
Disk
removal
extremely small. (The risk of deathfrom general anes-
KEY TERMS thesia for all types of surgery,for example,is only about
1 in 1,600.)
Diskectomy—The surgical removal of a portion of The most common risk of the surgery is infection,
an invertebral disk. which occurs in 1–2% of cases. Rarely,the surgery can
Dura—The strongest and outermost of three mem- damage nerves in the lower back or major blood vessels
branes that protect the brain, spinal cord, and in front of the disk. Occasionally, there may be some
nerves of the cauda equina. residual paralysisof a particular leg or bladder muscle
after surgery, but this is the result of the disk problem
Herniated disk—A blisterlike bulging or protrusion
that necessitated the surgery,not the operation itself.
of the contents of the disk out through the fibers
that normally hold them in place. It is also called a While disk removals can relieve pain in 90% of
ruptured disk, slipped disk, or displaced disk. cases,there are some people who do not get pain relief,
depending on how long they had the condition requiring
Intervertebral disk—Cylindrical elastic-like gel
surgery and other factors.
pads that separate and join each pair of vertebrae
in the spine.
Laminectomy—An operation in which the sur- Normal results
geon cuts through the covering of a vertebra to
After about five days, most patients can leave the
reach a herniated disk in order to remove it.
hospital. They can resume all normal activities,including
Vertebra—The bones that make up the back bone work,after four to six weeks of recuperation at home.
(spine).
In properly evaluated patients,there is a very good
chance that disk removal will be successful in easing
pain. Even in patients over age 60, disk surgery has a
“good to excellent” result for 87% of patients. Disk
Aftercare surgery can relieve both back and leg pain,but the great-
est pain relief will occur with the leg pain.
After the operation, the patient will awaken lying
flat and face down,and must remain this way for several
days,changing position only to avoid bedsores. There Resources
maybe slight pain or stiffness in the back area.
BOOKS
Patients should sleep on a firm mattress and avoid White III,Augustus. Your Aching Back.New York:Simon &
bending at the waist,lifting heavy weights,or sitting in Schuster,1990.
one spot for a long time (such as riding in a car). The Surgery Book:An Illustrated Guide to 73 of the Most Com-
mon Operations.Ed. Robert M. Younson,et al. New York:
After surgery,patients can usually leave the hospital
St. Martin’s Press,1993.
on the fourth or fifth day. They must:
•avoid sitting for more than 15–20 minutes Carol A. Turkington
•use a reclined chair
Diskectomy see Disk removal
•avoid bending,twisting,or lifting
•begin gentle walking (indoors or outdoors),gradually
increasing
•begin stationary biking or gentle swimming after two
weeks
Dislocations and subluxations
•continue exercisefor the next four weeks
Definition
•slow down if they experience more than minor pain in
the back or leg In medicine,the terms dislocation and subluxation
refer to the displacement of bones that form a joint.
These conditions affecting the joint most often result
Risks
from trauma that causes adjoining bones to no longer
All surgery carries some risk due to heart and lung align with each other. A partial or incomplete dislocation
problems or the anesthesia itself,but this risk is generally is called a subluxation.
1082 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoitaxulbus
dna
snoitacolsiD
Description
In a healthy joint, the bones are normally held
together with tough, fibrous bands called ligaments.
These ligaments are attached to each bone along with a
fibrous sac surrounding the joint called the articular cap-
sule or joint capsule. The ligaments and joint capsule are
relatively strong and nonelastic but permit movement
within normal limits for each particular joint. In the event
of a dislocation,one of the bones making up the joint is
forced out of its natural alignment from excessive
stretching and tearing of the joint ligaments and capsule.
Muscles and tendons surrounding the joint are usually
stretched and injured to some degree.
Causes and symptoms
A violent movement at the joint that exceeds normal
limits usually causes a joint dislocation. Although dislo-
cations often result from trauma,they sometimes occur
as a result of disease affecting the joint structures. In the
process of the dislocation, there is tearing of the liga-
ments and the articular capsule,which are vital structures
for connecting the bone. Following a dislocation, the
bones affected are often immobile and the affected limb
may be locked in an abnormal position; fractures are
also a concern with severe dislocations.
Important factors in recognizing a dislocation or
subluxation include a history of experiencing a fall or
receiving a blow in a particular joint followed by the sud-
den onset of loss of function to the involved limb. Imme-
diately after the dislocation, the joint almost always
swells significantly and feels painful when pressure is
applied (point tenderness). If trauma to the joint causing
the dislocation or subluxation is violent in nature,small
Treatment
chips of bone can be torn away with the supporting struc-
tures. Chronic recurrent dislocations may take place Immediately after the dislocation,the application of
without severe painbecause of the somewhat slack con- ice is helpful to control swelling and decrease pain. If the
dition of the surrounding muscles and other supporting patient needs to be transported,it is important to prevent
tissues. A first-time dislocation is considered and treated the joint from moving (immobilization). At times,a cast
as a possible fracture. Risk factors that can increase sus- or splint may be used to immobilize the joint and ensure
ceptibility of joint dislocation and subluxation are shal- proper alignment and healing. The treatment of realign-
low or abnormally formed joint surfaces present at birth ing bones following a dislocation is called reduction.
(congenital) and/or other diseases of ligaments and tissue This may include simple maneuvers that manipulate the
around a joint. Some infants are born with a hip disloca- joint to reposition the bones or surgical procedures to
tion. Both sexes and all ages are affected. restore the joint to its normal position. A general anesthe-
sia or muscle relaxant may be used to help make joint
reduction possible by relaxing surrounding muscles in
Diagnosis
spasm. Acetaminophenor aspirinare sometimes used
A thorough medical history and physical exam by a to control moderate pain, and narcotics may be pre-
physician is the first step in the correct diagnosis of dis- scribed by the physician if the pain is severe. Recurring
locations and subluxations. X rays of the joint and adja- dislocation may require surgical reconstruction or
cent bones can locate and help determine the extent of replacement of the joint. It is not recommended to
dislocated joints attempt to reset a dislocated joint outside of a medical
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1083
Dislocations
and
subluxations
This x ray shows the dislocation between two bones in a
finger.(Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
environment with experienced medical personnel, holding it in correct alignment is stretched to such an
because a fracture may be present. extent that the joint becomes extremely vulnerable to
repeated dislocations. However,this chance of recur-
rent dislocation and subluxation will decrease if a
Alternative treatment
proper rehabilitation program is implemented to
Chiropractic care has been shown to be effective strengthen surrounding muscles of the joint. Most joint
for joint subluxation and dislocation, especially in the dislocations are curable with prompt treatment. After
spine. Swelling can be addressed using botanical thera- the dislocation has been corrected, the joint may
pies. Bromelain,a pineapple enzyme,and tumeric (Cur- require immobilization with a cast or sling for two to
cuma longa) are the most potent botanical remedies for eight weeks.
this purpose. Acute homeopathic care with arnica (Arni-
ca montana) can reduce the trauma to the body. Liga-
Prevention
ment and tendon strengthening can be assisted both
botanically and homeopathically. When an individual is involved in strenuous
sports or heavy work, involved joints may be protect-
ed by elastic bandage wraps, tape wraps, knee and
Prognosis
shoulder pads, or special support stockings. Keeping
Joint ligaments have poor blood supply and,there- the muscles surrounding the joint strong will also
fore,heal slowly. This healing process continues long help prevent dislocations. Long-term problems may
after the symptoms of the dislocation injury have also be prevented by allowing an adequate amount of
diminished. Once a joint has been either subluxated or time for an injured joint to rest and heal prior to
completely dislocated,the connective tissue binding or resuming full activity.
1084 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoitaxulbus
dna
snoitacolsiD
Anterior temporal Subcoracoid
mandibular dislocation dislocation (shoulder)
Posterior dislocation of hip Dislocation of thumb
Dislocations and subluxations refer to the displacement of bones that form a joint.Such conditions most often result from
trauma causing adjoining bones to no longer touch each other.A partial or incomplete dislocation is called a subluxation.
The illustrations above indicate dislocation of the jaw bone,shoulder blade,hip bone,and the thumb.(Illustration by Electronic
Illustrators Group.)
Description
KEY TERMS
In order to have a clear picture of these disorders,
dissociation should first be understood. Dissociation is a
Articular capsule—An envelope of tissue that sur-
mechanism that allows the mind to separate or compart-
rounds a free moving joint, composed of an exter-
mentalize certain memories or thoughts from normal
nal layer of white fibrous tissue and an external
consciousness. These split-off mental contents are not
synovial membrane that secretes a lubricant into
erased. They may resurface spontaneously or be trig-
the joint.
gered by objects or events in the person’s environment.
Dissociation is a process that occurs along a spec-
trum of severity. It does not necessarily mean that a per-
son has a dissociative disorder or other mental illness. A
Resources
mild degree of dissociation occurs with some physical
BOOKS
stressors; people who have gone without sleep for a long
Arnheim,Daniel D. Modern Principals of Athletic Training.St.
period of time, have had “laughing gas” for dental
Louis:Times Mirror/Mosby College Publishing Co.,
surgery, or have been in a minor accident often have
1989.
brief dissociative experiences. Another commonplace
Magee,David J. Orthopedic Physical Assessment.Philidel-
example of dissociation is a person becoming involved
phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1992.
Scully,Rosemary M.,and Marylou R. Barnes. Physical Thera- in a book or movie so completely that the surroundings
py.Philadelphia:J. B. Lippincott Co.,1989. or the passage of time are not noticed. Another example
might be driving on the highway and taking several exits
PERIODICALS without noticing or remembering. Dissociation is related
Gorden,Everett J. “Fractures and Dislocations:An Overview.” to hypnosis in that hypnotic trance also involves a tem-
Trauma37,no. 5 (Feb. 1996):5-36. porarily altered state of consciousness. Most patients
with dissociative disorders are highly hypnotizable.
OTHER People in other cultures sometimes have dissociative
Griffith,H. Winter. “Dislocations or Subluxation.”ThriveOnline.
experiences in the course of religious (in certain trance
1998. 25 Mar. 1998 <http://thriveonline.oxygen.com>.
states) or other group activities. These occurrences
should not be judged in terms of what is considered “nor-
Jeffrey P. Larson,RPT
mal”in the United States.
Moderate or severe forms of dissociation are caused
Disopyramide see Antiarrhythmic drugs
by such traumatic experiences as childhood abuse,com-
Disproportionate dwarfism see bat,criminal attacks,brainwashing in hostage situations,
or involvement in a natural or transportation disaster.
Achondroplasia
Patients with acute stress disorder, post-traumatic
Dissecting aneurysm see Aortic dissection stress disorder (PTSD), or conversion disorder and
somatization disorder may develop dissociative symp-
Dissecting hematoma see Aortic dissection
toms. Recent studies of trauma indicate that the human
Disseminated lupus erythematosus see brain stores traumatic memories in a different way than
Systemic lupus erythematosus normal memories. Traumatic memories are not
processed or integrated into a person’s ongoing life in
the same fashion as normal memories. Instead they are
dissociated,or “split off,”and may erupt into conscious-
ness from time to time without warning. The affected
person cannot control or “edit”these memories. Over a
period of time,these two sets of memories,the normal
Dissociative disorders and the traumatic,may coexist as parallel sets without
being combined or blended. In extreme cases,different
Definition sets of dissociated memories may alter subpersonalities
of patients with dissociative identity disorder (multiple
The dissociative disorders are a group of mental dis-
personality disorder).
orders that affect consciousness are defined as causing
significant interference with the patient’s general func- The dissociative disorders vary in their severity and
tioning,including social relationships and employment. the suddenness of onset. It is difficult to give statistics
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1085
Dissociative
disorders
for their frequency in the United States because they are Causes and symptoms
a relatively new category and are often misdiagnosed.
The moderate to severe dissociation that occurs in
And,criterion for diagnosis require significant impair-
patients with dissociative disorders is understood to
ment in social or vocational functioning.
result from a set of causes:
Dissociative amnesia •an innate ability to dissociate easily
•repeated episodes of severe physical or sexual abuse in
Dissociative amnesia is a disorder in which the
childhood
distinctive feature is the patient’s inability to remem-
ber important personal information to a degree that •the lack of a supportive or comforting person to coun-
cannot be explained by normal forgetfulness. In many teract abusive relative(s)
cases, it is a reaction to a traumatic accident or wit-
•the influence of other relatives with dissociative symp-
nessing a violent crime. Patients with dissociative
toms or disorders
amnesia may develop depersonalization or trance
The relationship of dissociative disorders to child-
states as part of the disorder, but they do not experi-
hood abuse has led to intense controversy and lawsuits
ence a change in identity.
concerning the accuracy of childhood memories. The
brain’s storage,retrieval,and interpretation of memories
Dissociative fugue
are still not fully understood. Controversy also exists
Dissociative fugue is a disorder in which a person regarding how much individuals presenting dissociative
temporarily loses his or her sense of personal identity and disorders have been influenced by books and movies to
travels to another location where he or she may assume a describe a certain set of symptoms (scripting).
new identity. Again, this condition usually follows a
The major dissociative symptoms are:
major stressor or trauma. Apart from inability to recall
their past or personal information,patients with dissocia-
Amnesia
tive fugue do not behave strangely or appear disturbed to
others. Cases of dissociative fugue are more common in Amnesia in a dissociative disorder is marked by
wartime or in communities disrupted by a natural disaster. gaps in a patient’s memory for long periods of time or for
traumatic events. Doctors can distinguish this type of
Depersonalization disorder amnesia from loss of memory caused by head injuries or
drug intoxication,because the amnesia is “spotty”and
Depersonalization disorder is a disturbance in
related to highly charged events and feelings.
which the patient’s primary symptom is a sense of
detachment from the self. Depersonalization as a symp-
Depersonalization
tom (not as a disorder) is quite common in college-age
populations. It is often associated with sleep deprivation Depersonalization is a dissociative symptom in
or “recreational” drug use. It may be accompanied by which the patient feels that his or her body is unreal,is
“derealization”(where objects in an environment appear changing, or is dissolving. Some patients experience
altered). Patients sometimes describe depersonalization depersonalization as being outside their bodies or watch-
as feeling like a robot or watching themselves from the ing a movie of themselves.
outside. Depersonalization disorder may also involve
feelings of numbness or loss of emotional “aliveness.” Derealization
Derealization is a dissociative symptom in which the
Dissociative identity disorder (DID)
external environment is perceived as unreal. The patient
Dissociative identity disorder (DID) is the newer may see walls,buildings,or other objects as changing in
name for multiple personality disorder (MPD). DID is shape,size,or color. In some cases,the patient may feel
considered the most severe dissociative disorder and that other persons are machines or robots, though the
involves all of the major dissociative symptoms. patient is able to acknowledge the unreality of this feeling.
Dissociative disorder not otherwise specified Identity disturbances
(DDNOS)
Patients with dissociative fugue,DDNOS,or DID
DDNOS is a diagnostic category ascribed to patients often experience confusion about their identities or
with dissociative symptoms that do not meet the full cri- even assume new identities. Identity disturbances result
teria for a specific dissociative disorder. from the patient having split off entire personality traits
1086 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sredrosid
evitaicossiD
or characteristics as well as memories. When a stressful
or traumatic experience triggers the reemergence of KEY TERMS
these dissociated parts,the patient may act differently,
answer to a different name,or appear confused by his or Amnesia—A general medical term for loss of
her surroundings. memory that is not due to ordinary forgetfulness.
Amnesia can be caused by head injuries, brain
Diagnosis disease, or epilepsy, as well as by dissociation.
When a doctor is evaluating a patient with dissocia- Depersonalization—A dissociative symptom in
tive symptoms,he or she will first rule out physical con- which the patient feels that his or her body is unre-
ditions that sometimes produce amnesia,depersonaliza- al, is changing, or is dissolving.
tion,or derealization. These physical conditions include
Derealization—A dissociative symptom in which
epilepsy,head injuries,brain disease,side effects of med-
the external environment is perceived as unreal.
ications,substance abuse,intoxication,AIDS,dementia
Dissociation—A psychological mechanism that
complex, or recent periods of extreme physical stress
allows the mind to split off traumatic memories or
and sleeplessness. In some cases,the doctor may give the
disturbing ideas from conscious awareness.
patient an electroencephalogram (EEG) to exclude
epilepsy or other seizure disorders. Fugue—A dissociative experience during which a
person travels away from home, has amnesia for
If the patient appears to be physically normal, the
their past, and may be confused about their identi-
doctor will rule out psychotic disturbances, including
ty but otherwise appear normal.
schizophrenia. In addition,doctors can use some psy-
chological teststo narrow the diagnosis. One is a screen- Hypnosis—The means by which a state of extreme
er, the Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES). If the relaxation and suggestibility is induced: used to
patient has a high score on this test,he or she can be eval- treat amnesia and identity disturbances that occur
uated further with the Dissociative Disorders Interview in dissociative disorders.
Schedule (DDIS) or the Structured Clinical Interview for
Multiple personality disorder (MPD)—An older
DSM-IVDissociative Disorders (SCID-D). It is also pos-
term for dissociative identity disorder (DID).
sible for doctors to measure a patient’s hypnotizability as
Trauma—A disastrous or life-threatening event
part of a diagnostic evaluation.
that can cause severe emotional distress, includ-
ing dissociative symptoms and disorders.
Treatment
Treatment of the dissociative disorders often com-
bines several methods.
nosis is related to the process of dissociation. Hypnosis
Psychotherapy may help patients recover repressed ideas and memories.
Patients with dissociative disorders often require Therapists treating patients with DID sometimes use
treatment by a therapist with some specialized under- hypnosis in the process of “fusing”the patient’s alternate
standing of dissociation. This background is particularly personalities.
important if the patient’s symptoms include identity
problems. Many patients with dissociative disorders are Prognosis
helped by group as well as individual treatment.
Prognoses for dissociative disorders vary. Recovery
from dissociative fugue is usually rapid. Dissociative
Medications
amnesia may resolve quickly,but can become a chronic
Some doctors will prescribe tranquilizers or antide-
disorder in some patients. Depersonalization disorder,
pressants for the anxiety and/or depression that often
DDNOS,and DID are usually chronic conditions. DID
accompany dissociative disorders. Patients with dissocia-
usually requires five or more years of treatment for
tive disorders are,however,at risk for abusing or becom-
recovery.
ing dependent on medications. As of 2001, there is no
drug that can reliably counteract dissociation itself.
Prevention
Hypnosis
Since the primary cause of dissociative disorders is
Hypnosis is frequently recommended as a method of thought to involve extended periods of humanly inflicted
treatment for dissociative disorders,partly because hyp- trauma,prevention depends on the elimination of child
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1087
Dissociative
disorders
abuse and psychological abuse of adult prisoners or high blood pressure. These drugs act on the kidneys to
hostages. increase urine output. This reduces the amount of fluid in
the bloodstream,which in turn lowers blood pressure.
Resources
BOOKS Description
“Dissociative Disorders.”In Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
There are several types of diuretics,also called water
of Mental Disorders.4th ed. Washington,DC:The Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association,1994. pills:
Eisendrath,Stuart J. “Psychiatric Disorders.”In Current Med-
•Loop diuretics, such as bumetanide (Bumex) and
ical Diagnosis and Treatment,1998.37th ed. Ed. Stephen
furosemide (Lasix), get their name from the loop-
McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997.
shaped part of the kidneys where they have their effect.
Kolb,Lawrence C.,and Keith H. Brodie. Modern Clinical Psy-
chiatry.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1982. •Thiazide diuretics include such commonly used diuret-
Napier,Nancy J. Getting Through The Day:Strategies for ics as hydrochlorothiazide (HydroDIURIL, Esidrix),
Adults Hurt as Children.New York and London:W. W.
chlorothiazide (Diuril),and chlorthalidone (Hygroton).
Norton & Co.,1994.
Nemiah,John C. “Psychoneurotic Disorders.”In The New Har- •Potassium-sparing diuretics prevent the loss of potassi-
vard Guide to Psychiatry,ed. Armand M. Nicholi Jr. um,which is a problem with other types of diuretics.
Cambridge,MA:The Belknap Press of Harvard Universi- Examples of potassium-sparing diuretics are amiloride
ty Press,1988. (Midamor) and triamterene (Dyrenium).
Noll,Richard. The Encyclopedia of Schizophrenia and the Psy-
In addition,some medicines contain combinations
chotic Disorders.New York:Facts On File,1992.
Pascuzzi,Robert M.,and Mary C. Weber. “Conversion Disor- of two diuretics. The brands Dyazide and Maxzide,for
ders,Malingering,and Dissociative Disorders.”In Cur- example, contain the thiazide diuretic hydrochloroth-
rent Diagnosis.Vol. 9. Ed. Rex B. Conn,et al. Philadel- iazide with the potassium-sparing diuretic triamterene.
phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
Some nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines
“Psychiatric Disorders:Hysterical Neurosis.”In The Merck
contain diuretics. However, the medicines described
Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.16th ed. Ed. Robert
Berkow. Rahway,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,1992. here cannot be bought without a physician’s prescrip-
van der Kolk,Bessel A.,and Onno van der Hart. “The Intrusive tion. They are available in tablet, capsule, liquid, and
Past:The Flexibility of Memory and the Engraving of Trau- injectable forms.
ma.”In Trauma:Explorations in Memory,ed. Cathy Caruth.
Baltimore:The Johns Hopkins University Press,1995.
Recommended dosage
Rebecca J. Frey
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
diuretic and may be different for different patients.
Dissociative identity disorder see Multiple
Check with the physician who prescribed the drug or the
personality disorder
pharmacist who filled the prescription for the correct
dosage,and take the medicine exactly as directed.
Precautions
Seeing a physician regularly while taking a diuretic
Diuretics is important. The physician will check to make sure the
medicine is working as it should and will watch for
Definition
unwanted side effects.
Diuretics are medicines that help reduce the amount Some people feel unusually tired when they first
of water in the body. start taking diuretics. This effect usually becomes less
noticeable over time,as the body adjusts to the medicine.
Purpose
Because diuretics increase urine output,people who
Diuretics are used to treat the buildup of excess fluid take this medicine may need to urinate more often,even
in the body that occurs with some medical conditions during the night. Health care professionals can help
such as congestive heart failure,liver disease,and kid- patients schedule their doses to avoid interfering with
ney disease. Some diuretics are also prescribed to treat their sleep or regular activities.
1088 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sciteruiD
For patients taking the kinds of diuretics that rob PREGNANCY. Diuretics will not help the swelling of
potassium from the body, physicians may recommend hands and feet that some women have during
adding potassium-rich foods or drinks,such as citrus fruits pregnancy. In general,pregnant women should not use
and juices,to the diet. Or they may suggest taking a potas- diuretics unless a physician recommends their use.
sium supplement or taking another medicine that keeps the Although studies have not been done on pregnant
body from losing too much potassium. If the physician women, studies of laboratory animals show that some
recommends any of these measures,be sure to closely fol- diuretics can cause harmful effects when taken during
low his or her directions. Do not make other diet changes pregnancy.
without checking with the physician. People who are tak-
BREASTFEEDING. Some diuretics pass into breast
ing potassium-sparing diuretics should not add potassium
milk,but no reports exist of problems in nursing babies
to their diets,as too much potassium may be harmful.
whose mothers use this medicine. However, thiazide
People who take diuretics may lose too much water diuretics may decrease the flow of breast milk. Women
or potassium when they get sick,especially if they have who are breastfeeding and need to use a diuretic should
severe vomiting and diarrhea. They should check with check with their physicians.
their physicians if they become ill.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Side effects of
These medicines make some people feel lighthead-
some diuretics may be more likely in people who have
ed,dizzy,or faint when they get up after sitting or lying
had a recent heart attackor who have liver disease or
down. Older people are especially likely to have this
severe kidney disease. Other diuretics may not work
problem. Drinking alcohol,exercising,standing for long
properly in people with liver disease or severe kidney
periods,or being in hot weather may make the problem
disease. Diuretics may worsen certain medical condi-
worse. To lessen the problem,get up gradually and hold
tions,such as gout,kidney stones,pancreatitis,lupus
onto something for support if possible. Avoid drinking
erythematosus,and hearing problems. In addition,peo-
too much alcohol and be careful in hot weather or when
ple with diabetes should be aware that diuretics may
exercising or standing for a long time.
increase blood sugar levels. People with heart or blood
Anyone who is taking a diuretic should be sure to vessel disease should know that some diuretics increase
tell the health care professional in charge before having cholesterol or triglyceride levels. The risk of an allergic
surgical or dental procedures,medical tests or emergency reaction to certain diuretics is greater in people with
treatment. bronchial asthma. Before using diuretics, people with
any of these medical problems should make sure their
Some diuretics make the skin more sensitive to sun-
physicians are aware of their conditions. Also, people
light. Even brief exposure to sun can cause a severe sun-
who have trouble urinating or who have high potassium
burn,itching,a rash,redness,or other changes in skin
levels in their blood may not be able to take diuretics and
color. While being treated with this medicine, avoid
should check with a physician before using them.
being in direct sunlight,especially between 10 a.m. and 3
p.m.; wear a hat and tightly woven clothing that covers USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking diuretics with
the arms and legs; use a sunscreen with a skin protection certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs work or
factor (SPF) of at least 15; protect the lips with a sun may increase the chance of side effects.
block lipstick; and do not use tanning beds, tanning
booths,or sunlamps. People with fair skin may need to
Side effects
use a sunscreen with a higher skin protection factor.
Some side effects,such as loss of appetite,nausea
and vomiting,stomach cramps,diarrhea and dizziness,
Special conditions
usually lessen or go away as the body adjusts to the med-
People who have certain medical conditions or who icine. These problems do not need medical attention
are taking certain other medicines may have problems if unless they continue or interfere with normal activities.
they take diuretics. Before taking these drugs,be sure to
Patients taking potassium-sparing diuretics should
let the physician know about any of these conditions:
know the signs of too much potassium and should check
ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reac- with a physician as soon as possible if any of these symp-
tions to diuretics or sulfonamides(sulfa drugs) in the toms occur:
past should let his or her physician know before using
•irregular heartbeat
a diuretic. The physician should also be told about any
•breathing problems
allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other sub-
stances. •numbness or tingling in the hands,feet,or lips
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1089
Diuretics
•Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors,such
KEY TERMS as benazepril (Lotensin), captopril (Capoten), and
enalapril (Vasotec),used to treat high blood pressure.
Inflammation—Pain, redness, swelling, and heat Taking these drugs with potassium-sparing diuretics
that usually develop in response to injury or illness. may cause levels of potassium in the blood to be too
high,increasing the chance of side effects.
Lupus erythematosus—A chronic disease that
affects the skin, joints, and certain internal organs. •Cholesterol-lowering drugs such as cholestyramine
(Questran) and colestipol (Colestid). Taking these
Pancreas—A gland located beneath the stomach.
drugs with combination diuretics such as Dyazide and
The pancreas produces juices that help break
Maxzide may keep the diuretic from working. Take the
down food.
diuretic at least one hour before or four hours after the
Potassium—A mineral found in whole grains, cholesterol-lowering drug.
meat, legumes, and some fruits and vegetables.
•Cyclosporine (Sandimmune),a medicine that suppress-
Potassium is important for many body processes,
es the immune system. Taking this medicine with
including proper functioning of the nerves and
potassium-sparing diuretics may increase the chance of
muscles.
side effects by causing levels of potassium in the blood
Triglyceride—A substance formed in the body from to be too high.
fat in the diet. Triglycerides are the main fatty mate-
•Potassium supplements, other medicines containing
rials in the blood. Together with protein, they make
potassium, or salt substitutes that contain potassium.
up high- and low-density lipoproteins (HDLs and
Taking these with potassium-sparing diuretics may lead
LDLs). Triglyceride levels are important in the diag-
to too much potassium in the blood, increasing the
nosis and treatment of many diseases including
chance of side effects.
high blood pressure, diabetes, and heart disease.
•Lithium,used to treat bipolar disorder(manic-depres-
sive illness). Using this medicine with potassium-spar-
ing diuretics may allow lithium to build up to poiso-
nous levels in the body.
•confusion or nervousness
•Digitalis heart drugs,such as digoxin (Lanoxin). Using
•unusual tiredness or weakness
this medicine with combination diuretics such as tri-
•weak or heavy feeling in the legs
amterene-hydrocholorthiazide (Dyazide,Maxzide) may
Patients taking diuretics that cause potassium loss cause blood levels of the heart medicine to be too high,
should know the signs of too little potassium and should making side effects such as changes in heartbeat more
check with a physician as soon as possible if they have likely.
any of these symptoms:
The list above does not include every drug that may
•fast or irregular heartbeat interact with diuretics. Check with a physician or phar-
•weak pulse macist before combining diuretics with any other pre-
scription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine.
•nausea or vomiting
•dry mouth
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
•excessive thirst
•muscle cramps or pain Diverticulitis see Diverticulosis and
•unusual tiredness or weakness diverticulitis
•mental or mood changes
Interactions
Diuretics may interact with other medicines. When
Diverticulosis and
this happens,the effects of one or both of the drugs may
diverticulitis
change or the risk of side effects may be greater. Anyone
who takes a diuretic should let the physician know all
Definition
other medicines he or she is taking and should ask whether
the possible interactions can interfere with drug therapy. Diverticulosis refers to a condition in which the
Among the drugs that may interact with diuretics are: inner, lining layer of the large intestine (colon) bulges
1090 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitilucitrevid
dna
sisolucitreviD
out (herniates) through the outer,muscular layer. These
outpouchings are called diverticula. Diverticulitis refers
to the development of inflammation and infection in one
or more diverticula.
Description
Diverticula tend to occur most frequently in the
last segment of the large intestine,the sigmoid colon.
They occur with decreasing frequency as one examines
further back toward the beginning of the large intes-
tine. The chance of developing diverticula increases
with age,so that by the age of 50,about 20–50% of all
people will have some diverticula. By the age of 90,
virtually everyone will have developed some diverticu-
la. Most diverticula measure about 3 mm to just over 3
cm in diameter. Larger diverticula,termed giant diver-
ticula, are quite infrequent, but may measure as large
as 15 cm in diameter.
Causes and symptoms
Diverticula are believed to be caused by overly
forceful contractions of the muscular wall of the large
intestine. As areas of this wall spasm,they become weak-
er and weaker,allowing the inner lining to bulge through.
The anatomically weakest areas of the intestinal wall
occur next to blood vessels which course through the
wall,so diverticula commonly occur in this location.
Diverticula are most common in the developed
countries of the West (North America, Great Britain,
northern and western Europe). This is thought to be due
to the diet of these countries,which tends to be quite low
in fiber. A diet low in fiber results in the production of
smaller volumes of stool. In order to move this smaller condition (such as irritable bowel syndrome) might be
stool along the colon and out of the rectum, the colon responsible. A complication of diverticulosis occurs
must narrow itself significantly,and does so by contract- because many diverticula develop in areas very near
ing down forcefully. This causes an increase in pressure, blood vessels. Therefore,one serious risk of diverticulosis
which,over time,weakens the muscular wall of the intes- involves bleeding. Although an infrequent complication,
tine and allows diverticular pockets to develop. the bleeding can be quite severe. Seventy-five percent of
such bleeding episodes occur due to diverticula located on
The origin of giant diverticula development is not
the right side of the colon. About 50% of the time,such
completely understood,although one theory involves gas
bleeding will stop on its own.
repeatedly entering and becoming trapped in an already-
existing diverticulum,causing stretching and expansion One of the most common and potentially serious
of that diverticulum. complications of diverticulosis is inflammation and infec-
tion of a particular diverticulum,called diverticulitis.
The great majority of people with diverticulosis will
remain symptom-free. Many diverticula are quite acci-
Diverticulitis is three times more likely to occur in
dentally discovered during examinations for other condi-
the left side of the large intestine. Since most diverticula
tions of the intestinal tract.
are located in the sigmoid colon (the final segment of the
Some people with diverticulosis have symptoms such large intestine which empties into the rectum), most
as constipation, cramping, and bloating. It is unclear diverticulitis also takes place in the sigmoid. The elderly
whether these symptoms are actually caused by the diver- have the most serious complications from diverticulitis,
ticula themselves,or whether some other gastrointestinal although very severe infections can also occur in patients
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1091
Diverticulosis
and
diverticulitis
A barium study x ray showing colonic diverticulosis.(Cus-
tom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
under the age of 50. Men are three times as likely as Diagnosis of diverticulitis is not difficult in
women to be stricken with diverticulitis. patients with previously diagnosed diverticulosis. The
presence of abdominal pain and fever in such an indi-
Diverticulitis is believed to occur when a hardened
vidual would make the suspicion of diverticulitis quite
piece of stool, undigested food, and bacteria (called a
high. Examination of the abdomen will usually reveal
fecalith) becomes lodged in a diverticulum. This block-
tenderness to touch,with the patient’s abdominal mus-
age interferes with the blood supply to the area, and
cles contracting strongly to protect the tender area.
infection sets in.
During a rectal exam (performed by inserting a finger
An individual with diverticulitis will experience pain into the rectum), a doctor may be able to feel an
(especially in the lower left side of the abdomen) and fever.
abnormal mass. Touching this mass may prove painful
In response to the infection and the irritation of nearby tis-
to the patient.
sues within the abdomen, the abdominal muscles may
When a practitioner is suspicious of diverticulitis as
begin to spasm. About 25% of all patients with diverticuli-
the cause for the patient’s symptoms,he or she will most
tis will have some rectal bleeding, although this rarely
likely avoid the types of tests usually used to diagnose
becomes severe. Walled-off pockets of infection, called
gastrointestinal disorders. These include barium enema
abscesses,may appear within the wall of the intestine,or
and endoscopy. The concern is that the increased pres-
even on the exterior surface of the intestine. When a diver-
sure exerted on the intestine during these exams may
ticulum weakens sufficiently,and is filled to bulging with
increase the likelihood of intestinal perforation. After
infected pus,a perforation in the intestinal wall may devel-
medical treatment for the diverticulitis,these examina-
op. When the infected contents of the intestine spill out into
tions may be performed in order to learn the extent of the
the abdomen,the severe infection called peritonitismay
patient’s disease.
occur. Peritonitis is an infection and inflammation of the
lining of the abdominal cavity,the peritoneum. Other com-
plications of diverticulitis include the formation of abnor- Treatment
mal connections between two organs that normally do not
Only about 20% of patients with diverticulosis ever
connect (fistulas; for example,the intestine and the blad-
have symptoms which lead them to seek medical help.
der),and scarring outside of the intestine which squeezes
Most people never know that they have diverticula. For
off a portion of the intestine,obstructing it.
those individuals who have cramping pain and constipa-
tion believed to be due to diverticulosis,the usual pre-
Diagnosis
scription involves increasing the fiber in the diet. This
As mentioned, the majority of diverticula do not can be done by adding special diet supplements of bran
cause any symptoms,and are often found by coincidence or psyllium seed,which increase stool volume. Bleeding
during an examination being performed for some other diverticula can usually be treated by bed rest,with blood
medical condition. transfusion needed for more severe bleeding (hemor-
rhaging). In cases of very heavy hemorrhaging,medica-
When diverticula are suspected because a patient
tions which encourage clotting can be injected during the
begins to have sudden rectal bleeding,the location of the
course of a diagnostic angiography.
bleeding can be studied by performing an angiography.
Angiography involves inserting a tiny tube through an While there are almost no situations when uncom-
artery in the leg,and moving it up into one of the major plicated diverticulosis requires surgery,giant diverticula
arteries of the gastrointestinal system. A particular chem- always require removal. This is due to the very high
ical (contrast medium) which will show up on x-ray chance of infection and perforation of these diverticula.
films is injected,and the area of bleeding is located by When giant diverticula are diagnosed, the usual treat-
looking for an area where the contrast is leaking into the ment involves removing that portion of the intestine.
interior (lumen) of the intestine.
Treatment for uncomplicated diverticulitis usually
A procedure called endoscopy provides another requires hospitalization. “Resting the bowel”is a main-
method for examining the colon and locating the site of stay of treatment,and involves keeping the patient from
bleeding. In endoscopy, a small, flexible scope (endo- eating or sometimes even drinking anything by mouth.
scope) is inserted through the rectum and into the intes- Therefore,the patient will need to receive fluids through
tine. The scope usually bears a fiber-optic camera,which a needle in the vein (intravenous or IV fluids). Antibi-
allows the view through this endoscope to be projected otics will also be administered through the IV. Some
onto a television screen. The operator can introduce the physicians will agree to try treatment at home for very
endoscope further and further through the intestine to mildly ill patients. These patients will be put on a liquid
find the location of the bleeding. diet and receive oral antibiotics.
1092 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitilucitrevid
dna
sisolucitreviD
The various complications of diverticulitis need to
be treated aggressively,because the deathrate from such KEY TERMS
things as perforation and peritonitis is quite high.
Abscesses can be drained of their infected contents by Angiography—An x-ray study of the arteries in a
inserting a needle through the skin of the abdomen and particular part of the body. Angiography is often
into the abscess. When this is unsuccessful,open abdom- performed in order to localize internal bleeding.
inal surgery will be required to remove the piece of the
Bowel obstruction—A blockage in the intestine intestine containing the abscess. Fistulas require surgical
which prevents the normal flow of waste down the
repair,including the removal of the length of intestine
length of the intestine.
containing the origin of the fistula,followed by immedi-
ate reconnection of the two free ends of intestine. Peri- Colostomy—A procedure performed when a large
tonitis requires open surgery. The entire abdominal cavi- quantity of intestine is removed. The end piece of
ty is cleaned by being irrigated (washed) with a warmed the intestine leading to the rectum is closed.
sterile saltwater solution, and the damaged piece of Diverticula—Outpouchings in the large intestine
intestine is removed. Obstructions require immediate caused when the inner, lining layer of the large
surgery to prevent perforation. Massive,uncontrollable intestine (colon) bulges out (herniates) through the
bleeding,while rare,may require removal of part or all outer, muscular layer.
of the large intestine.
Endoscopy—Examination of an area of the gas-
During any of these types of operations,the surgeon trointestinal tract by putting a lighted scope, usual-
must make an important decision regarding the quantity ly bearing a fiber-optic camera, into the rectum,
of intestine which must be removed. When the amount of and passing it through the intestine.
intestine removed is great, it may be necessary to per-
Fistula—An abnormal connection formed between
form a colostomy. A colostomy involves pulling the end
two organs that usually have no connection what-
of the remaining intestine through the abdominal wall,to
soever.
the outside. This bit of intestine is then fashioned so that
a bag can be fit over it. The patient’s waste (feces) collect Sigmoid colon—The final portion of the large
in the bag,because the intestine no longer connects with intestine that empties into the rectum.
the rectum. This colostomy may be temporary,in which
case another operation will be required to reconnect the
intestine,after some months of substantial healing has
that there may be a connection between the intestine
occurred. Other times,the colostomy will need to be per-
and the bladder)
manent,and the patient will have to adjust to living per-
manently with the colostomy bag. Most people with •when there is any question of cancer
colostomies are able to go on with a very active life.
•when the diverticular disease appears to be progressing
Occasionally,a patient will have such severe diver- rapidly
ticular disease that a surgeon recommends planning
ahead,and schedules removal of a portion of the colon.
Prognosis
This is done to avoid the high risk of surgery performed
after a complication has set in. Certain developments in a The prognosis for people with diverticula is excel-
patient will identify those patients who are at very high lent, with only 20% of such patients ever seeking any
risk of experiencing dangerous complications. Such elec- medical help for their condition.
tive surgery may be recommended:
While diverticulitis can be a difficult and painful dis-
•when an older individual has had several attacks of ease,it is usually quite treatable. Prognosis is worse for
diverticulitis individuals who have other medical problems,particular-
ly those requiring the use of steroid medications,which
•when someone under the age of 50 has had even one
increase the chances of developing a serious infection.
attack
Prognosis is also worse in the elderly.
•when treatment does not get rid of a painful mass
•when the intestine appears to be narrowing on x-ray Prevention
examination (this could suggest the presence of cancer)
While there is no absolutely certain way to prevent
•when certain patients begin to regularly experience the development of diverticula,it is believed that high-
painful urination or urinary infections (this suggests fiber dietsare of help. Foods that are recommended for
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1093
Diverticulosis
and
diverticulitis
their high fiber content include whole grain breads and Description
cereals, and all types of fruits and vegetables. Most
The brain coordinates information from the eyes,the
experts suggest that individuals take in about 0.71–1.23
inner ear,and the body’s senses to maintain balance. If
oz (20–35 g) of fiber daily. If this is not possible to
any of these information sources is disrupted,the brain
achieve through a person’s diet,there are fiber products
may not be able to compensate. For example, people
which can be mixed into 8 oz (.237 l) of water or juice,
sometimes experience motion sickness because the
and which provide about 0.13–19 oz (4–6 g) of fiber.
information from their body tells the brain that they are
sitting still,but information from the eyes indicates that
Resources
they are moving. The messages don’t correspond and
BOOKS dizziness results.
Isselbacher,Kurt J.,and Alan Epstein. “Diverticular,Vascular,
Vision and the body’s senses are the most important
and Other Disorders of the Intestine and Peritoneum.”In
systems for maintaining balance, but problems in the
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony
S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997. inner ear are the most frequent cause of dizziness. The
inner ear,also called the vestibular system,contains fluid
PERIODICALS
that helps fine tune the information the brain receives
Cerda,James J.,et al. “Diverticulitis:Current Management
from the eyes and the body. When fluid volume or pres-
Strategies.”Patient Care31,no. 12 (15 July 1997):170+.
sure in one inner ear changes,information about balance
Cunningham,Mark A.,et al. “Medical Versus Surgical Manage-
is altered. The discrepancy gives conflicting messages to
ment of Diverticulitis in Patients Under Age 40.”American
Journal of Surgery174,no. 6 (Dec. 1997):733+. the brain about balance and induces dizziness.
“Diet and Diverticular Disease in Men.”Nutrition Research
Certain medical conditions can cause dizziness,
Newsletter14,no. 2 (Nov. 1994):28.
because they affect the systems that maintain balance.
“Diet for Diverticulosis.”Consumer Reports on Health8,no.
For example,the inner ear is very sensitive to changes in
11 (Nov. 1996):132.
blood flow. Because medical conditions such as high
“Keeping Diverticulosis Silent.”Berkeley Wellness Letter12,
blood pressure or low blood sugar can affect blood flow,
no. 4 (Jan. 1996):6+.
Munson,Marty,and Teresa Yeykal. “Outrun Trouble:Running these conditions are frequently accompanied by dizzi-
and Bran Cereal in the Prevention of Diverticular Dis- ness. Circulation disorders are the most common causes
ease.”Prevention,47,no. 9 (Sept. 1995):38+. of dizziness. Other causes are head injury,ear infection,
allergies,and nervous system disorders.
ORGANIZATIONS
National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse. 2 Infor- Dizziness often disappears without treatment or with
mation Way,Bethesda,MD 20892-3570. (800) 891-5389. treatment of the underlying problem,but it can be long
<http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health/digest/nddic.htm>. term or chronic. According to the National Institutes of
Health, 42% of Americans will seek medical help for
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD dizziness at some point in their lives. The costs may
exceed a billion dollars and account for five million doc-
tor visits annually. Episodes of dizziness increase with
age. Among people aged 75 or older, dizziness is the
Dizziness most frequent reason for seeing a doctor.
Definition
Causes and symptoms
As a disorder,dizziness is classified into three cate-
Careful attention to symptoms can help determine
gories—vertigo, syncope, and nonsyncope nonvertigo.
the underlying cause of the dizziness. Underlying prob-
Each category has a characteristic set of symptoms, all
lems may be benign and easily treated or they may be
related to the sense of balance. In general, syncope is
dangerous and in need of intensive therapy. Not all cases
defined by a brief loss of consciousness (fainting) or by
of dizziness can be linked to a specific cause. More than
dimmed vision and feeling uncoordinated,confused,and
one type of dizziness can be experienced at the same
lightheaded. Many people experience a sensation like
time and symptoms may be mixed. Episodes of dizziness
syncope when they stand up too fast. Vertigo is the feeling
may last for a few seconds or for days. The length of an
that either the individual or the surroundings are spinning.
episode is related to the underlying cause.
This sensation is like being on a spinning amusement
park ride. Individuals with nonsyncope nonvertigo dizzi- The symptoms of syncope include dimmed vision,
ness feel as though they cannot keep their balance. This loss of coordination, confusion, lightheadedness, and
feeling may become worse with movement. sweating. These symptoms can lead to a brief loss of con-
1094 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ssenizziD
sciousness or fainting. They are related to a reduced flow Diagnosis
of blood to the brain; they often occur when a person is
During the initial medical examination,an individ-
standing up and can be relieved by sitting or lying down.
ual with dizziness should provide a detailed description
Vertigo is characterized by a sensation of spinning or turn-
of the type of dizziness experienced,when it occurs,and
ing,accompanied by nausea,vomiting,ringing in the ears,
how often each episode lasts. A diary of symptoms may
headache, or fatigue. An individual may have trouble
help track this information. Report any symptoms that
walking,remaining coordinated,or keeping balance. Non-
accompany the dizziness,such as a ringing in the ear or
syncope nonvertigo dizziness is characterized by a feeling
nausea,any recent injury or infection,and any medica-
of being off balance that becomes worse if the individual
tion taken.
tries moving or performing detail-intense tasks.
Blood pressure,pulse,respiration,and body temper-
A person may experience dizziness for many rea-
ature are checked,and the ear,nose,and throat are scruti-
sons. Syncope is associated with low blood pressure,
nized. The sense of balance is assessed by moving the
heart problems,and disorders in the autonomic nervous
individual’s head to various positions or by tilt-table test-
system, the system of involuntary functions such as
ing. In tilt-table testing,the person lies on a table that can
breathing. Syncope may also arise from emotional dis-
be shifted into different positions and reports any dizzi-
tress,pain,and other reactions to outside stressors. Non-
ness that occurs.
syncope nonvertigo dizziness may be caused by rapid
breathing, low blood sugar, or migraine headache, as Further tests may be indicated by the initial exami-
well as by more serious medical conditions. nation. Hearing tests help assess ear damage. x rays,
computed tomography scan (CT scan), and magnetic
Vertigo is often associated with inner ear problems
resonance imaging (MRI) can pinpoint evidence of
called vestibular disorders. A particularly intense vestibular
nerve damage,tumor,or other structural problems. If a
disorder,Méniére’s disease,interferes with the volume of
vestibular disorder is suspected, a technique called
fluid in the inner ear. This disease,which affects approxi-
electronystagmography (ENG) may be used. ENG mea-
mately one in every 1,000 people,causes intermittent verti-
sures the electrical impulses generated by eye move-
go over the course of weeks,months,or years. Méniére’s
ments. Blood tests can determine diabetes,high choles-
disease is often accompanied by ringing or buzzing in the
terol,and other diseases. In some cases,a heart evalua-
ear, hearing loss, and a feeling that the ear is blocked. tion may be useful. Despite thorough testing,an underly-
Damage to the nerve that leads from the ear to the brain can
ing cause cannot always be determined.
also cause vertigo. Such damage can result from head
injury or a tumor. An acoustic neuroma,for example,is a
benign tumor that wraps around the nerve. Vertigo can also Treatment
be caused by disorders of the central nervous system and
Treatment is determined by the underlying cause. If
the circulatory system,such as hardening of the arteries
an individual has a cold or influenza,a few days of bed
(arteriosclerosis),stroke,or multiple sclerosis.
rest is usually adequate to resolve dizziness. Other caus-
Some medications cause changes in blood pressure es of dizziness,such as mild vestibular system damage,
or blood flow. These medications can cause dizziness in may resolve without medical treatment.
some people. Prescription medications carry warnings If dizziness continues, drug therapy may prove
of such side effects, but common drugs, such as caf- helpful. Because circulatory problems often cause dizzi-
feine or nicotine can also cause dizziness. Certain ness, medication may be prescribed to control blood
antibioticscan damage the inner ear and cause hearing pressure or to treat arteriosclerosis. Sedatives may be
loss and dizziness. useful to relieve the tension that can trigger or aggravate
dizziness. Low blood sugar associated with diabetes
Diet may cause dizziness. The role of diet may be
sometimes causes dizziness and is treated by controlling
direct,as through alcohol intake. It may be also be indi-
blood sugar levels. An individual may be asked to avoid
rect,as through arteriosclerosis caused by a high-fat diet.
caffeine, nicotine, alcohol, and any substances that
Some people experience a slight dip in blood sugar and
cause allergic reactions. A low-salt diet may also help
mild dizziness if they miss a meal,but this condition is
some people.
rarely dangerous unless the person is diabetic. Food sen-
sitivities or allergies can also be a cause of dizziness. When other measures have failed, surgery may be
Chronic conditions, such as heart disease, and serious suggested to relieve pressure on the inner ear. If the
acute problems,such as seizures and strokes,can cause dizziness is not treatable by drugs, surgery, or other
dizziness. However,such conditions usually exhibit other means,physical therapy may be used and the patient may
characteristic symptoms. be taught coping mechanisms for the problem.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1095
Dizziness
Prognosis
KEY TERMS
Outcome depends on the cause of dizziness. Control-
ling or curing the underlying factors usually relieves dizzi-
Acoustic neuroma—A benign tumor that grows on
ness. In some cases,dizziness disappears without treat-
the nerve leading from the inner ear to the brain.
ment. In a few cases,dizziness can become a permanent
As the tumor grows, it exerts pressure on the inner
disabling condition and a person’s options are limited.
ear and causes severe vertigo.
Arteriosclerosis—Hardening of the arteries caused
Prevention
by high blood cholesterol and high blood pressure.
Most people learn through experience that certain
Autonomic nervous system—The part of the ner-
activities will make them dizzy and they learn to avoid
vous system that controls involuntary functions
them. For example,if reading in a car produces motion
such as breathing and heart beat.
sickness,an individual leaves reading materials for after
Computed tomography (CT)—An imaging tech-
the trip. Changes to the diet can also cut down on
nique in which cross-sectional x rays of the body
episodes of dizziness in susceptible people. Relaxation
are compiled to create a three-dimensional image
techniques can help ward off tension and anxiety that
of the body’s internal structures.
can cause dizziness.
Electronystagmography—A method for measuring
These techniques can help minimize or even prevent
the electricity generated by eye movements. Elec-
dizziness for people with chronic diseases. For example,
trodes are placed on the skin around the eye and
persons with Méniére’s disease may avoid episodes of
the individual is subjected to a variety of stimuli so
vertigo by leaving salt,alcohol,and caffeine out of their
that the quality of eye movements can be assessed.
diets. Reducing blood cholesterol can help diminish arte-
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—An imaging riosclerosis and indirectly treat dizziness.
technique that uses a large circular magnet and
Some cases of dizziness cannot be prevented.
radio waves to generate signals from atoms in the
Acoustic neuromas,for example,are not predictable or
body. These signals are used to construct images of
preventable. When the underlying cause of dizziness can-
internal structures.
not be discovered,it may be difficult to recommend pre-
Vestibular system—The area of the inner ear that ventive measures. Alternative approaches designed to
helps maintain balance. rebalance the body’s energy flow,such as acupuncture
and constitutional homeopathy,may be helpful in cases
where the cause of dizziness cannot be pinpointed.
Alternative treatment Resources
Because dizziness may arise from serious conditions, BOOKS
it is advisable to seek medical treatment. Alternative treat- Yardley,Lucy. Vertigo and Dizziness.New York:Routledge,1994.
ments can often be used alongside conventional medicine
PERIODICALS
without conflict. Relaxation techniques,such as yogaand
Bowen,James. “Dizziness:A Diagnostic Puzzle.”Hospital
massage therapythat focus on relieving tension,are pop-
Medicine34,no.1 (1998):39.
ularly recommended methods for reducing stress. Aro-
Ruckenstein,Michael J. “A Practical Approach to Dizziness.”
matherapists recommend a warm bath scented with essen-
Postgraduate Medicine97,no.3 (Mar. 1995):70.
tial oils of lavender,geranium,and sandalwood.
ORGANIZATIONS
Homeopathic therapies can work very effectively Méniére’s Network. 1817 Patterson St.,Nashville,TN 37203.
(800) 545-4327. <http://www.earfoundation.org>.
for dizziness, and are especially applicable when no
The Vestibular Disorders Association. PO Box 4467,Portland,
organic cause can be identified. An osteopath or chiro-
OR 97208-4467. (503) 229-7705. <http://www.teleport.
practor may suggest adjustments of the head,jaw,neck,
com/~veda>.
and lower back to relieve pressure on the inner ear.
Acupuncturists also offer some treatment options for
Julia Barrett
acute and chronic cases of dizziness. Nutritionists may
be able to offer advice and guidance in choosing dietary
DKA see Diabetic ketoacidosis
supplements,identifying foods to avoid,and balancing
nutritional needs. DLE see Discoid lupus erythematosus
1096 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ssenizziD
Domestic violence see Abuse
Donovanosis see Granuloma inguinale
Doppler echocardiography see
Echocardiography
Doppler ultrasonography
Definition
Doppler ultrasonography is a non-invasive diagnos-
tic procedure that changes sound waves into an image
that can be viewed on a monitor.
Purpose
Doppler ultrasonography can detect the direction,
velocity, and turbulence of blood flow. It is frequently
used to detect problems with heart valves or to measure
blood flow through the arteries. Specifically,it is useful
in the work up of strokepatients,in assessing blood flow
in the abdomen or legs,and in viewing the heart to moni-
tor carotid artery diseases.
Precautions being studied. The image allows the doctor to see the
organ functioning in real time.
The test is widely used because it is noninvasive,
uses no x rays,and gives excellent images. It is harmless, The newest addition to this test is the addition of
painless,and widely available. color. Adding color to the image shows the direction and
rate of blood flow more clearly.
Description During a Doppler ultrasonography procedure the
technician will apply a gel to the skin, then place the
Doppler ultrasonography makes use of two different
transducer against the skin at various angles. The trans-
principles. The ultrasound principle is this:when a high-
ducer sends the information it receives to a television
frequency sound is produced and aimed at a target,it will
monitor that shows a moving image of the organ being
be reflected by its target and the reflected sound can be
studied. The technician can save these images either on
detected back at its origin. In addition,it is known that
video tape,paper,or x-ray film for further study.
certain crystals (called piezoelectric crystals) produce an
electrical pulse when vibrated by a returning sound.
Preparation
The Doppler principle is simply that sound pitch
There is no special preparation needed for this test.
increases as the source moves toward the listener and
The ultrasound technician may apply a clear gel to the skin
decreases as it moves away.
in order to help the transducer more freely over the body.
Medical science utilizes these two principles in the
following way. A transducer (sometimes called a probe)
Aftercare
containing piezoelectric crystals sends a series of short
sound pulses into the body and pauses between each No aftercare is necessary.
pulse to listen for the returning sounds. The machine
then determines the direction and depth of each returning
Normal results
sound and coverts this into a point of light on a television
monitor. Thousands of these pulses are computed and A Doppler ultrasonography test showing no restrict-
displayed every second to produce an image of the organ ed blood flow,is a normal finding.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1097
Doppler
ultrasonography
Ultrasound doppler
transducer
Carotid artery
Doppler ultrasonography can detect the direction,velocity,
and turbulence of blood flow.Because it is non-invasive and
uses no x rays,doppler ultrasongraphy is widely used for
numerous diagnostic procedures.(Illustration by Electronic
Illustrators Group.)
event is referred to as nondisjunction. When this defec-
KEY TERMS tive cell is involved in the conception of a baby,that baby
will have a total of 47 chromosomes. The extra chromo-
Doppler effect—The principle that the sound of some in Down syndrome is labeled number 21. For this
an object moving toward you has a higher pitch reason, the existence of three such chromosomes is
than the sound when it’s moving away from you. sometimes referred to as Trisomy 21.
Transducer—The part of a machine that changes In a very rare number of Down syndrome cases
signals in one form into another form. (about 1–2%),the original egg and sperm cells are com-
pletely normal. The problem occurs sometime shortly
Ultrasound—Sound that is too high for the human
after fertilization; during the phase where cells are divid-
ear to hear.
ing rapidly. One cell divides abnormally,creating a line
of cells with an extra chromosome 21. This form of
genetic disorder is called a mosaic. The individual with
this type of Down syndrome has two types of cells:those
Abnormal results with 46 chromosomes (the normal number), and those
with 47 chromosomes (as occurs in Down syndrome).
Disrupted or obstructed blood flow through the neck
Some researchers have suggested that individuals with
arteries may indicate the person is a risk of having a
this type of mosaic form of Down syndrome have less
stroke. (Narrowed arterial flow in the legs does not nec-
severe signs and symptoms of the disorder.
essarily indicate a risk of stroke.)
Another relatively rare genetic accident which can
Resources cause Down syndrome is called translocation. During cell
division,the number 21 chromosome somehow breaks. A
BOOKS
piece of the 21 chromosome then becomes attached to
McGoon,Michael D.,ed. Mayo Clinic Heart Book:The Ulti-
another chromosome. Each cell still has 46 chromosomes,
mate Guide to Heart Health.New York:William Morrow
but the extra piece of chromosome 21 results in the signs
and Co.,Inc.,1993.
Office Practice of Neurology.Ed. Martin Samuels and Steven and symptoms of Down syndrome. Translocations occur
Feske. New York:Churchill Livingstone,1996. in about 3–4% of cases of Down syndrome.
von Reutern,G. M.,and H. J. von Budingen. Ultrasound Diag-
Down syndrome occurs in about one in every
nosis of Cerebrovascular Disease.New York:Georg
800–1,000 births. It affects an equal number of boys and
Thieme Verlag,1993.
girls. Less than 25% of Down syndrome cases occur due
Dorothy Elinor Stonely to an extra chromosome in the sperm cell. The majority
of cases of Down syndrome occur due to an extra chro-
mosome 21 within the egg cell supplied by the mother
(nondisjunction). As a woman’s age (maternal age)
increases, the risk of having a Down syndrome baby
Down syndrome increases significantly. For example,at younger ages,the
risk is about one in 4,000. By the time the woman is age
Definition 35, the risk increases to one in 400; by age 40 the risk
increases to one in 110; and by age 45 the risk becomes
Down syndrome is the most common cause of men-
one in 35. There is no increased risk of either mosaicism
tal retardation and malformation in a newborn. It
or translocation with increased maternal age.
occurs because of the presence of an extra chromosome.
Description Causes and symptoms
Chromosomes are the units of genetic information While Down syndrome is a chromosomal disorder,a
that exist within every cell of the body. Twenty-three dis- baby is usually identified at birth through observation of
tinctive pairs,or 46 total chromosomes,are located with- a set of common physical characteristics. Babies with
in the nucleus (central structure) of each cell. When a Down syndrome tend to be overly quiet,less responsive,
baby is conceived by the combining of one sperm cell with weak, floppy muscles. Furthermore, a number of
with one egg cell, the baby receives 23 chromosomes physical signs may be present. These include:
from each parent,for a total of 46 chromosomes. Some-
•flat appearing face
times, an accident in the production of a sperm or egg
cell causes that cell to contain 24 chromosomes. This •small head
1098 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
nwoD
•flat bridge of the nose Because of weak, floppy muscles (hypotonia), babies
learn to sit up,crawl,and walk much later than their nor-
•smaller than normal,low-set nose
mal peers. Talking is also quite delayed. The level of
•small mouth,which causes the tongue to stick out and
mental retardation is considered to be mild-to-moderate
to appear overly large
in Down syndrome. The actual IQ range of Down syn-
•upward slanting eyes drome children is quite varied,but the majority of such
•extra folds of skin located at the inside corner of each children are in what is sometimes known as the trainable
eye,near the nose (called epicanthal folds) range. This means that most people with Down syn-
drome can be trained to do regular self-care tasks,func-
•rounded cheeks
tion in a socially appropriate manner in a normal home
•small,misshapen ears
environment,and even hold simple jobs.
•small,wide hands
As people with Down syndrome age, they face an
•an unusual,deep crease across the center of the palm increased chance of developing the brain disease called
(called a simian crease) Alzheimer’s (sometimes referred to as dementia or
senility). Most people have a six in 100 risk of develop-
•a malformed fifth finger
ing Alzheimer’s,but people with Down syndrome have a
•a wide space between the big and the second toes
25 in 100 chance of the disease. Alzheimer’s disease
•unusual creases on the soles of the feet causes the brain to shrink and to break down. The num-
•overly-flexible joints (sometimes referred to as being ber of brain cells decreases,and abnormal deposits and
double-jointed) structural arrangements occur. This process results in a
loss of brain functioning. People with Alzheimer’s have
•ahorter than normal height
strikingly faulty memories. Over time, people with
Other types of defects often accompany Down syn- Alzheimer’s disease will lapse into an increasingly unre-
drome. About 30–50% of all children with Down syn- sponsive state. Some researchers have shown that even
drome are found to have heart defects. A number of dif- Down syndrome patients who do not appear to have
ferent heart defects are common in Down syndrome, Alzheimer’s disease have the same changes occurring to
including abnormal openings (holes) in the walls that the structures and cells of their brains.
separate the heart’s chambers (atrial septal defect,ven-
As people with Down syndrome age,they also have
tricular septal defect). These result in abnormal patterns
an increased chance of developing a number of other ill-
of blood flow within the heart. The abnormal blood flow
nesses,including cataracts,thyroid problems,diabetes,
often means that less oxygen is sent into circulation
and seizure disorders.
throughout the body. Another heart defect that occurs in
Down syndrome is called Tetralogy of Fallot. Tetralogy
of Fallot consists of a hole in the heart,along with three Diagnosis
other major heart defects. Diagnosis is usually suspected at birth, when the
characteristic physical signs of Down syndrome are
Malformations of the gastrointestinal tract are pre-
sent in about 5–7% of children with Down syndrome. noted. Once this suspicion has been raised,genetic test-
The most common malformation is a narrowed,obstruct-
ing(chromosome analysis) can be undertaken in order to
verify the presence of the disorder. This testing is usually
ed duodenum (the part of the intestine into which the
done on a blood sample,although chromosome analysis
stomach empties). This disorder,called duodenal atresia,
can also be done on other types of tissue,including skin.
interferes with the baby’s milk or formula leaving the
The cells to be studied are prepared in a laboratory.
stomach and entering the intestine for digestion. The
Chemical stain is added to make the characteristics of the
baby often vomits forcibly after feeding,and cannot gain
cells and the chromosomes stand out. Chemicals are
weight appropriately until the defect is repaired.
added to prompt the cells to go through normal develop-
Other medical conditions that occur in patients with
ment,up to the point where the chromosomes are most
Down syndrome include an increased chance of develop-
visible, prior to cell division. At this point, they are
ing infections,especially ear infections and pneumonia;
examined under a microscope and photographed. The
certain kidney disorders; thyroid disease (especially low
photograph is used to sort the different sizes and shapes
or hypothyroid); hearing loss; vision impairment requir-
of chromosomes into pairs. In most cases of Down syn-
ing glasses (corrective lenses); and a 20-times greater
drome,one extra chromosome 21 will be revealed. The
chance of developing leukemia (a blood disorder).
final result of such testing,with the photographed chro-
Development in a baby and child with Down syn- mosomes paired and organized by shape and size, is
drome occurs at a much slower than normal rate. called the individual’s karyotype.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1099
Down
syndrome
Treatment to have rich,meaningful relationships. Because of educa-
tional programs,some people with Down syndrome are
No treatment is available to cure Down syndrome.
able to hold jobs.
Treatment is directed at addressing the individual con-
cerns of a particular patient. For example,heart defects Men with Down syndrome appear to be uniformly
will many times require surgical repair,as will duodenal sterile (meaning that they are unable to have offspring).
atresia. Many Down syndrome patients will need to wear Women with Down syndrome,however,are fully capa-
glasses to correct vision. Patients with hearing impair- ble of having babies. About 50% of these babies,howev-
ment benefit from hearing aids. er,will also be born with Down syndrome.
A new drug,referred to as a “smart drug,”has been
receiving some attention in the treatment of Down syn-
Prevention
drome patients. This drug, piracetam, has not been
proven to increase intellectual ability,despite testimoni- Efforts at prevention of Down syndrome are aimed
als that have been receiving attention on television and at genetic counseling of couples who are preparing to
the Internet. Piracetam has not been approved for use in have babies. A counselor needs to inform a woman that
the United States,although it is being sold via the Inter- her risk of having a baby with Down syndrome increases
net. The National Down Syndrome Society and the with her increasing age. Two types of testing is available
National Down Syndrome Congress do not recommend during a pregnancyto determine if the baby being car-
the use of this drug as of 2001. ried has Down syndrome.
While some decades ago,all Down syndrome chil- Screening tests are used to estimate the chance that
dren were quickly placed into institutions for lifelong an individual woman will have a baby with Down syn-
care. Research shows very clearly that the best outlook drome. At 14–17 weeks of pregnancy,measurements of a
for children with Down syndrome is a normal family life substance called AFP (alpha-fetoprotein) can be per-
in their own home. This requires careful support and edu- formed. AFP is normally found circulating in the blood
cation of the parents and the siblings. It is a life-changing of a pregnant woman,but may be unusually high or low
event to learn that a new baby has a permanent condition with certain disorders. Carrying a baby with Down syn-
that will effect essentially all aspects of his or her devel- drome often causes AFP to be lower than normal. This
opment. Some community groups exist to help families information alone,or along with measurements of two
deal with the emotional effects of this new information, other hormones,is considered along with the mother’s
and to help plan for the baby’s future. Schools are age to calculate the risk of the baby being born with
required to provide services for children with Down syn- Down syndrome. These results are only predictions,and
drome, sometimes in separate special education class- are only correct about 60% of the time.
rooms, and sometimes in regular classrooms (this is
The only way to definitively establish (with about
called mainstreaming or inclusion).
98–99% accuracy) the presence or absence of Down syn-
drome in a developing baby, is to test tissue from the
pregnancy itself. This is usually done either by amnio-
Prognosis
centesisor chorionic villus sampling(CVS). In amnio-
The prognosis in Down syndrome is quite variable, centesis,a small amount of the fluid in which the baby is
depending on the types of complications (heart defects, floating is withdrawn with a long,thin needle. In chori-
susceptibility to infections,development of leukemia) of onic villus sampling,a tiny tube is inserted into the open-
each individual baby. The severity of the retardation can ing of the uterus to retrieve a small sample of the placen-
also vary significantly. Without the presence of heart ta (the organ that attaches the growing baby to the moth-
defects,about 90% of children with Down syndrome live er via the umbilical cord, and provides oxygen and
into their teens. People with Down syndrome appear to nutrition). Both amniocentesis and CVS allow the
go through the normal physical changes of agingmore baby’s own karyotype to be determined. A couple must
rapidly,however. The average age of deathfor an indi- then decide whether to use this information in order to
vidual with Down syndrome is about 50–55 years. begin to prepare for the arrival of a baby with Down syn-
drome,or to terminate the pregnancy.
Still,the prognosis for a baby born with Down syn-
drome is better than ever before. Because of modern Once a couple has had one baby with Down syn-
medical treatments,including antibioticsto treat infec- drome,they are often concerned about the likelihood of
tions and surgery to treat heart defects and duodenal atre- future offspring also being born with the disorder. Most
sia, life expectancy has greatly increased. Community research indicates that this chance remains the same as
and family support allows people with Down syndrome for any woman at a similar age. However,when the baby
1100 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
nwoD
Tingey,C. Down Syndrome:A Resource Handbook.Boston:
KEY TERMS Little,Brown,Inc.,1988.
Tierney,Lawrence,et. al. Current Medical Diagnosis and
Treatment.Los Altos:Lange Medical Publications,2001.
Chromosome—The structures that carry genetic
information. Chromosomes are located within PERIODICALS
every cell, and are responsible for directing the Carlson,Tucker,and Jason Cowley. “When a Life is Worth
development and functioning of all the cells in the Living:Down’s Syndrome Children.”The Times,29 Nov.
body. The normal number is 46 (23 pairs). 1996,18+.
“Medical and Surgical Care for Children with Down Syn-
Karyotype—The specific chromosomal makeup of
drome.”The Exceptional Parent25,no. 11 (Nov. 1995):
a particular cell.
78+.
Mental retardation—A condition where an indi- Roan,Shari. “Elixir of Hope?”Los Angeles Times6 Mar. 1996,
vidual has a lower-than-normal IQ, and thus is E1.
Tanner,Lindsey. “Study:Drug May Hurt Syndrome Kids.”
developmentally delayed.
Chicago:Associated Press,12 Apr. 2001.
Mosaic—A term referring to a genetic situation, in
which an individual’s cells do not have the exact ORGANIZATION
same composition of chromosomes. In Down syn- National Down Syndrome Congress. 1605 Chantilly Drive,
Suite 250,Atlanta,GA 30324-3269. (800) 232-6372.
drome, this may mean that some of the individ-
National Down Syndrome Society. 666 Broadway,8th Floor,
ual’s cells have a normal 46 chromosomes, while
New York,NY 10012-2317. (800) 221-4602. <http://
other cells have an abnormal 47 chromosomes.
www.ndss.org>.
Nondisjunction—A genetic term referring to an
event which takes place during cell division, in Kim A. Sharp,M.Ln.
which a genetic accident causes an egg or sperm
cell to have 24 chromosomes, rather than the nor- Down’s syndrome see Down syndrome
mal 23.
Doxazosin see Alpha -adrenergic blockers
1
Translocation—A genetic term referring to a situa-
Doxepin see Antidepressants, tricyclic
tion during cell division in which a piece of one
chromosome breaks off and sticks to another chro- Doxycycline see Tetracyclines
mosome.
Dracontiasis see Guinea worm infection
Trisomy—The condition of having three identical
chromosomes, instead of the normal two. Dracunculiasis see Guinea worm infection
Drooping eyelid see Ptosis
Drowning see Near-drowning
with Down syndrome has the type that results from a Drug abuse see Substance abuse and
translocation,it is possible that one of the two parents is
dependence
a carrier of that defect. A carrier “carries” the genetic
defect, but does not actually have the disorder. When Drug addiction see Substance abuse and
one parent is a carrier of a translocation,the chance of dependence
future offspring having Down syndrome is greatly
Drug dependence see Substance abuse and
increased. The specific risk will have to be calculated by
dependence
a genetic counselor.
Resources
BOOKS
Carey,John C. “Chromosomal Disorders.”In Rudolph’s Pedi-
atrics,ed. Abraham M. Rudolph. Stamford:Appleton & Drug metabolism/interactions
Lange,1998.
Shapiro,Larry J. “Human Genetics.”In Nelson Textbook of Definition
Pediatrics,ed. Richard Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B.
Drug metabolism is the process by which the body
Saunders Co.,1998.
Stray-Gunderson,K. Babies with Down Syndrome:A New Par- breaks down and converts medication into active chemi-
ents’Guide.Kensington:Woodbine House,1986. cal substances.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1101
Drug
metabolism/interactions
Precautions Causes and symptoms
Drugs can interact with other drugs,foods,and bev- Drugs that commonly interact with other medica-
erages. Interactions can lessen or magnify the desired tions include:
therapeutic effect of a drug,or may cause unwanted or
•Diuretics. Diuretics such as hydrochlorothiazide can
unexpected side effects. There are thousands of possible
reduce serum potassium and sodium electrolyte levels
drug-to-drug and drug-to-food interactions, and many
when taken with digoxin and lithium,respectively.
medications and supplements are contraindicated (not
recommended) under certain conditions or in patients •Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). MAOI antide-
with specific diseases and disorders. This is why it is pressants can cause convulsions and other serious side
imperative that patients always keep their physician fully effects when used with tricyclic antidepressants (e.g.,
informed about all drugs and dietary supplements Imipramine,Nortriptyline),selective serotonin reup-
(including herbal remedies) they are taking. take inhibitors (SSRIs), or sympathomimetic drugs
(e.g.,amphetamines).
Description
•Antibiotics. Antibiotics may reduce the efficiency of
oral contraceptives.
The primary site of drug metabolism is the liver,the
•Metals. Medications containing metals, such as
organ that plays a major role in metabolism,digestion,
detoxification,and elimination of substances from the antacids with aluminum additives and iron supple-
body. Enzymes in the liver are responsible for chemically
ments,can reduce the absorption of tetracyclinesand
fluoroquinolones.
changing drug components into substances known as
metabolites. Metabolites are then bound to other sub- •Drugs that inhibit liver enzyme function. Drugs that
stances for excretion through the lungs,or bodily fluids slow drug metabolism include ciprofloxacin, ery-
such as saliva,sweat,breast milk,and urine,or through thromycin, fluoxetine, nefazodone, paroxetine, and
reabsorption by the intestines. The primary mode of ritonavir. The therapeutic effect of other medications
excretion is through the kidneys. taken with these drugs may be amplified. Warfarin,a
The family of liver isoenzymes known as cytochrome blood thinner,should be used with great caution in indi-
P-450 are crucial to drug metabolism. These enzymes viduals taking these drugs.
(labeled CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and
Foods and beverages that may interact with drugs
CYP3A4) have a catabolic action on substances,breaking
include:
them down into metabolites. Consequently,they also act to
lower the concentration of medication in the bloodstream. •Grapefruit juice. Grapefruit juice inhibits the metabo-
lism of many medications, including cyclosporine,
Drug interactions can occur when one drug inhibits
felodipine,nifedipine,nitrendipine,nisoldipine,carba-
or induces a P-450 that acts on another drug. An exam-
mazepine,triazolam,and midazolam.
ple is nicotine,a drug contained in tobacco,and known
to induce P-450s. Individuals with liver disease (e.g., •Foods and beverages with tyramines. Red wine,malted
cirrhosis) may also have insufficient levels of P-450 beers,smoked foods (e.g.,fish and meats),dried fruits,
enzymes. As a result,the concentration of drugs metab- and aged cheeses may contain tyramines,and can cause
olized by these enzymes (e.g., amprenavir and other a severe and dangerous elevation in blood pressure
protease inhibitors) remains high and can build up to when taken with MAOI inhibitors (a class of antide-
toxic levels in the bloodstream. In addition, certain pressants).
medications and foods, such as grapefruit juice, can
•Dairy products. Milk,cream,and other dairy products
inactivate or lessen the metabolic activity of P-450s.
containing calcium can prevention the absorption of
Changing the drug dosage can alleviate the problem in
antibiotics such as tetracycline, doxycycline, and
some cases.
ciprofloxacin when they are taken with the drug. In
The metabolic rate can vary significantly from per- addition,whole milk with vitamin D can cause milk-
son to person,and drug dosages that work quickly and alkali syndrome in patients taking aluminum hydroxide
effectively in one individual may not work well for antacids.
another. Factors such as genetics,environment,nutri-
•Caffeinated beverages. The caffeinecontained in cof-
tion and age also influence drug metabolism; infants
fee and colas can influence drug metabolism.
and elderly patients may have a reduced capacity to
metabolize certain drugs,and may require adjustments •Alcohol. Alcohol is a central nervous system depressant,
in dosage. and should not be taken with other CNS depressants
1102 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoitcaretni/msilobatem
gurD
KEY TERMS
Catabolism—A process of metabolism that breaks Liver—A solid organ located on the right in the
down complex substances into simple ones. upper abdomen. It plays a major role in metabo-
lism, digestion, detoxification, and elimination of
Cirrhosis—Liver disease characterized by the wide-
substances from the body.
spread disruption of the normal liver structure and
function.
Metabolism—The sum of all the physical and
CNS depressant—Anything that depresses, or
chemical processes occurring in the body to orga-
slows, the sympathetic impulses of the central ner-
nize and maintain life.
vous system (i.e., respiratory rate, heart rate).
Drug interaction—A chemical or physiological Metabolites—Substances produced by metabolism
reaction that can occur when two different drugs or by a metabolic process.
are taken together.
Enzymes—Organic substances (proteins) composed Milk-alkali syndrome—Elevated blood calcium lev-
of amino acids that trigger and regulate chemical els and alkalosis caused by excessive intake of milk
reactions in the body. There are over 700 identified and alkalis. Usually occurs in the treatment of pep-
human enzymes. tic ulcer.
(e.g.,antipsychotics,antihistamines). In addition,cer- effects associated with herbal supplements. Individuals who
tain fermented beverages may contain tyramines experience serious side effects from dietary supplements
should report them to FDA’s MedWatch program.
This list is not all-inclusive and individuals should
always let their doctor and pharmacist know when they
are taking other medications,herbal remedies,or dietary Diagnosis
supplements. Anyone who experiences a serious reaction
Drug interactions can be difficult to detect. In some
to a drug that is not consistent with its product labelling
cases,adverse reactions may closely resemble the symp-
should report the event to their doctor and/or the Med-
toms of the disease or condition the medication was pre-
Watch adverse event reporting system of the United
scribed to treat. Patients who take a number of medications
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
or self-treat with over-the-counter drugs and/or herbal
remedies may not be able to determine which drug actually
Alternative treatment triggered the interaction. A 2001 study by University of
The growing use of herbal supplements has also Florida researchers found that less than half of the women
increased the opportunity for adverse drug and herbal participating disclosed their use of herbal therapies to their
interactions. In 2000,the FDA issued a warning on the healthcare providers. In cases where a serious drug or herb
popular herb St. John’s wort(Hypericum perforatum). interaction occurs,withholding this information can delay
The supplement was found to inhibit the effect of indi- diagnosis and put the patient at increased risk.
navir,a protease inhibitor used in the treatment of HIV. It
may also affect the action of cyclosporine and other pro-
Treatment
tease inhibitors (e.g.,amprenavir,ritonavir). Further clin-
Treatment of a drug interaction is dependant on a
ical studies are still necessary to determine the full meta-
number of factors,including the medication(s) or supple-
bolic effects of the herb.
ments used and the medical history of the patient. A
Other herbs which may interact with allopathic med-
dosage adjustment may reverse the effects of some inter-
ications include gingko bilboa,ginseng,and garlic,which
actions. Serious or life-threatening interactions will
may all heighten the blood thinning effect of the anticoagu-
require more aggressive therapies.
lant warfarin. Because herbs are regulated by the FDA as
dietary supplements,they do not require the same extensive
Prevention
clinical trials and premarket testing as drugs do before they
are cleared for sale in the United States As such,there is still Patients with chronic health conditions,particularly
much to learn about the potential interactions and adverse those with liver disorders, should always inform their
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1103
Drug
metabolism/interactions
healthcare professional before taking any over-the- for over one million poisonings each year from drugs,
counter (OTC) medications or dietary supplements. alcohol,and other chemicals and toxic substances. Peo-
Because of the risk for a drug-to-drug interaction,individ- ple who suffer from depression and who have suicidal
uals should also let their doctor know if they are taking thoughts are also at high risk for drug overdose.
drugs prescribed by other physicians. Individuals should
closely follow instructions for use and package directions
Causes and symptoms
on both prescription and over-the-counter drugs. Consult-
ing with a pharmacist and/or physician may be beneficial Accidental drug overdose may be the result of mis-
if package directions are unclear to the patient. use of prescription medicines or commonly used medica-
tions like painrelievers and cold remedies. Symptoms
As a rule,grapefruit juice should not be taken with
differ depending on the drug taken. Some of the drugs
medication unless recommended by a doctor. Patients
commonly involved in overdoses are listed below along
taking MAOI inhibitors should always check food and
with symptoms and outcomes.
beverage labels to ensure tyramines aren’t included,and
should avoid all fermented drinks. Acetaminophen is the generic name for the com-
monly used pain reliever Tylenol. Overdose of this drug
causes liver damage with symptoms that include loss of
Resources
appetite,tiredness,nausea and vomiting,paleness,and
BOOKS
sweating. The next stage of symptoms indicates liver
Beers,Mark H.,and Robert Berkow. The Merck Manual of
failure and includes abdominal pain and tenderness,
Diagnosis and Therapy,17th ed.Whitehouse Station,NJ:
swelling of the liver,and abnormal blood tests for liver
Merck & Co.,Inc.,1999.
enzymes. In the last stage of this poisoning,liver failure
Medical Economics Company. The Physicians Desk Reference
advances and the patient becomes jaundiced,with yel-
(PDR).55th edition. Montvale,NJ:Medical Economics
Company,2001. lowing of the skin and whites of the eyes. They may also
experience kidney failure, bleeding disorders, and
PERIODICALS
encephalopathy (swelling of the brain).
Hardy,Mary L. “Herb-Drug Interactions:An Evidence-Based
Table.”Internal Medicine Alert23 (January 29,2001):1. Anticholinergic drugs (drugs that block the action of
acetylcholine,a neurotransmitter) like atropine,scopo-
ORGANIZATION
lamine,belladonna,antihistamines,and antipsychotic
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Med-
agents cause the skin and moist tissues (like in the mouth
Watch Adverse Events Reporting Program. 5600 Fishers
and nose) to become dry and flushed. Dilated pupils,an
Lane,Rockville,MD 20852-9787. 800-FDA-1088.
inability to urinate, and mental disturbances are also
<http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/>.
symptoms. Severe toxicity can lead to seizures,abnormal
Paula Anne Ford-Martin heart rhythms,extremely high blood pressure,and coma.
Antidepressant drugs like amitriptyline, desi-
pramine,and nortriptyline can cause irregular heart rate,
vomiting,low blood pressure,confusion,and seizures. An
overdose of antidepressants also causes symptoms similar
Drug overdose to those seen with anticholinergic drug overdoses.
Cholinergic drugs (drugs that stimulate the
Definition
parasympathetic nervous system) like carbamate and
A drug overdose is the accidental or intentional use pilocarpine cause nausea,diarrhea,increased secretion
of a drug or medicine in an amount that is higher than is of body fluids (sweat,tears,saliva,and urine),fatigue,
normally used. and muscle weakness. Convulsions are possible. Death
can occur due to respiratory failureand heart failure.
Description Cocaineand crack cocaine overdoses cause seizures,
high blood pressure,increased heart rate,paranoia,and
All drugs have the potential to be misused,whether
other changes in behavior. Heart attack or stroke are
legally prescribed by a doctor, purchased over-the-
serious risks within three days after cocaine overdose.
counter at the local drug store,or bought illegally on the
street. Taken in combination with other drugs or with Depressant drugs (tranquilizers,antianxiety drugs,
alcohol,even drugs normally considered safe can cause sleeping pills) cause sleepiness,slowed or slurred speech,
deathor serious long term consequences. Children are difficulty walking or standing,blurred vision,impaired
particularly at risk for accidental overdose,accounting ability to think,disorientation,and mood changes. Over-
1104 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esodrevo
gurD
dose symptoms can include slowed breathing,very low may show if there is damage to the liver or kidneys as a
blood pressure,stupor,coma,shock,and death. result of the overdose.
Digoxin,a drug used to regulate the heart,can cause
irregular heart beats,nausea,confusion,loss of appetite, Treatment
and blurred vision.
Immediate care
Narcotics or opiates are drugs like heroin,morphine,
If a drug overdose is discovered or suspected, and
and codeine. Clonidine and diphenoxylate (Lomotil) are
the person is unconscious,having convulsions,or is not
also in this category. Overdose with opiate drugs causes
breathing, call for emergency help immediately. If the
sedation(sleepiness),low blood pressure,slowed heart
person who took the drug is not having symptoms,don’t
rate, and slowed breathing. Pinpoint pupils, where the
wait to see if symptoms develop; call a poison control
black centers of the eyes become smaller than normal,
center immediately. Providing as much information as
are common in opiate overdose. However,if other drugs
possible to the poison control center can help determine
are taken at the same time as the opiates,they may coun-
what the next course of action should be.
teract this effect on the pupils. A serious risk is that the
patient will stop breathing. The poison control center, paramedics, and emer-
gency room staff will want to know:
Salicylates are found in aspirinand some creams or
ointments used for muscle and joint pain (like Ben-Gay), •what drug(s) were taken—try to locate the drug’s con-
and creams for psoriasis,a skin condition. Initial symp- tainer.
toms are gastrointestinal irritation,fever,and vomiting,
•how much of the drug was taken
possibly with blood in the vomit. This overdose will
•when was the drug taken
cause metabolic acidosisand respiratory alkalosis,con-
ditions where the body’s acid/base balance is malfunc- •was the drug taken with alcohol or any other drugs or
tioning. Symptoms include rapid heart beat and fast chemicals
breathing. Nervous system symptoms include confusion,
•what is the age of the patient
hallucinations, tiredness, and ringing in the ears. An
increased tendency to bleed is also common. Serious •what symptoms are the patient experiencing
complications include acute renal failure,coma,and heart •is the patient conscious
failure. Acute salicylate poisoning can lead to death.
•is the patient breathing
The poison control center may recommend trying to
Diagnosis get the patient to vomit. A liquid called ipecac syrup,
which is used to induce vomiting,is available from phar-
Diagnosis of a drug overdose may be based on the
macies without a prescription. Pediatricians may recom-
symptoms that develop,however,the drug may do exten-
mend that families keep ipecac syrup on hand in house-
sive damage to the body before significant symptoms
holds with children. This medication should be used only
develop. If the patient is conscious,he or she may be able
on the advice of a medical professional. Vomiting should
to tell what drugs were taken and in what amounts. The
not be induced if the patient is unconscious.
patient’s recent medical and social history may also help
in a diagnosis. For example,a list of medications that the
patient takes, whether or not alcohol was consumed Emergency care
recently,even if the patient has eaten in the last few hours
Emergency medical treatment may include:
before the overdose,can be valuable in determining what
•Assessment of the patient’s airway and breathing to
was taken and how fast it will be absorbed into the system.
making sure that the trachea,the passage to the lungs,is
Different drugs have varying effects on the body’s not blocked. If needed,a tube may be inserted through
acid/base balance and on certain elements in the blood the mouth and into the trachea to help the patient
like potassium and calcium. Blood tests can be used to breath. This procedure is called intubation.
detect changes in body chemistry that may give clues to
•Assessment of the patient’s heart rate,blood pressure,
what drugs were taken. Blood can also be screened for
body temperature,and other physical signs that might
various drugs in the system. Once the overdose drug is
indicate the effects of the drug.
identified, blood tests can be used to monitor how fast
the drug is being cleared out of the body. Urine tests can •Blood and urine samples may be collected to test for
also be used to screen for some drugs and to detect the presence of the suspected overdose drug,and any
changes in the body’s chemistry. Blood and urine tests other drugs or alcohol that might be present.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1105
Drug
overdose
also be used temporarily or long term if the kidneys are
KEY TERMS damaged due to the overdose.
•Antidotes are available for some drug overdoses. An
Gastric lavage—Also called a stomach pump. For antidote is another drug that counteracts or blocks the
this procedure, a flexible tube is inserted through overdose drug. For example,acetaminophen overdose
the nose, down the throat, and into the stomach can be treated with an oral medication, N-acetylcys-
and the contents of the stomach are suctioned out. teine (Mucomyst),if the level of acetaminophen found
The inside of the stomach is rinsed with a saline in the blood is extremely high. Naloxone is an anti-nar-
(salt water) solution. cotic drug that is given to counteract narcotic poison-
Intubation—A procedure where a tube is inserted ing. Nalmefen or methadonemay also be used.
through the mouth and into the trachea keep the •Psychiatric evaluation may be recommended if the drug
airway open and to help the patient breathe. overdose was taken deliberately.
Prognosis
•Elimination of the drug that has not yet been absorbed is While many victims of drug overdose recover with-
attempted. Vomiting may be induced using ipecac syrup out long term effects,there can be serious consequences.
or other drugs that cause vomiting. Ipecac syrup should Some drug overdoses cause the failure of major organs
not be given to patients who overdosed with tricyclic like the kidneys or liver,or failure of whole systems like
antidepressants,theophylline,or any drug that causes a the respiratory or circulatory systems. Patients who sur-
significant change in mental status. If a patient vomits vive drug overdose may need kidney dialysis,kidney or
while unconscious,there is a serious risk of choking. liver transplant,or ongoing care as a result of heart fail-
ure,stroke,or coma. Death can occur in almost any drug
•Gastric lavage, or washing out the stomach, may be
overdose situation,particularly if treatment is not started
attempted. For this procedure a tube flexible tube is
immediately.
inserted through the nose,down the throat,and into the
stomach. The contents of the stomach are then suc-
tioned out through the tube. A solution of saline (salt Prevention
water) is injected into the tube to rinse out the stomach.
To protect children from accidental drug overdose,
This solution is then suctioned out. This is the process
all medications should be stored in containers with child
used when someone has his/her stomach pumped.
resistant caps. All drugs should be out of sight and out of
•Activated charcoal is sometimes given to absorb the reach of children, preferably in a locked cabinet. Pre-
drug. scription medications should be used according to direc-
tions and only by the person whose name is on the label.
•Medication to stimulate urination or defecation may be
Threats of suicide need to be taken seriously and appro-
given to try to flush the excess drug out of the body
priate help sought for people with depression or other
faster.
mental illness that may lead to suicide.
•Intravenous (IV) fluids may be given. An intravenous
line,a needle inserted into a vein,may be put into the
Resources
arm or back of the hand. Fluids, either sterile saline
BOOKS
(salt water solution) or dextrose (sugar water solution),
Clinical Manual of Poisoning and Drug Overdose.Paramus:
can be administered through this line. Increasing fluids
Appleton-Century-Crofts and Fleschner Publishing Co.,
can help to flush the drug out of the system and to
1994.
reestablish balance of fluids and mineralsin the body.
Deglin,Judith Hopfer,and April Hazard Vallerand. Davis’s
The pH (acid/base balance) of the body may need to be
Drug Guide for Nurses.5th ed. Philadelphia:F. A. Davis
corrected by administering electrolytes like sodium, Co.,1996.
potassium, and bicarbonate through this IV line. If Ellerhorn,Matthew J. Ellerhorn’s Medical Toxicology:Diag-
drugs need to be administered quickly,they can also be nosis and Treatment of Human Poisoning. 2nd ed. Balti-
injected directly into the IV line. more:Williams & Wilkins,1996.
Haddad,Lester M. Clinical Management of Poisoning and
•Hemodialysis is a procedure where blood is circulated
Drug Overdose.3rd ed. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,
out of the body, pumped through a dialysis machine,
1998.
then reintroduced back into the body. This process can “Poisoning.”In The Merck Manual.16th ed. Rahway:Merck,
be used to filter some drugs out of the blood. It may 1992.
1106 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esodrevo
gurD
PERIODICALS TDM is important for patients who have other dis-
“Recognition and Treatment of Serious Antipsychotic Drug eases that can affect drug levels,or who take other medi-
Overdose.”Drugs & Therapy Perspectives11 (1998):13- cines that may affect drug levels by interacting with the
16. drug being tested. As an example,without drug monitor-
ing, the physician cannot be sure if a patient’s lack of
OTHER
“Drug Overdose.”American Institute of Preventative Medicine. response to an antibiotic reflects bacterial resistance,or
<http://www.healthy.net>. is the result of failure to reach the proper therapeutic
Graber,Mark A.,and Rhea Allen.”Emergency Medicine:Over- range of antibiotic concentration in the blood. In cases of
dose and Toxindromes.”University of Iowa Family Prac- life-threatening infections,timing of effective antibiotic
tice Handbook.<http://www.vh.org/Providers/ClinRef/ therapy is critical to success. It is equally crucial to avoid
FPHandbook/Chapter01/20-1.html>. toxicity in a seriously ill patient. Therefore, if toxic
symptoms appear with standard dosages,TDM can be
Altha Roberts Edgren
used to determine changes in dosing.
Drawn blood, used for TDM, demonstrates a drug
action in the body at any specific time,whereas drug lev-
els examined from urine samples reflect the presence of a
drug over many days (depending on the rate of excre-
Drug therapy monitoring
tion). Therefore,blood testing is the procedure of choice
Definition when definite data are required. However,for adequate
absorption and therapeutic levels to be accurate, it is
Drug therapy monitoring,also known as Therapeutic
important to allow for sufficient time to pass between the
Drug Monitoring (TDM),is a means of monitoring drug
administration of the medication and the collection of the
levels in the blood.
blood sample.
Blood specimens for drug monitoring can be taken
Purpose
at two different times:during the drug’s highest thera-
TDM is employed to measure blood drug levels so peutic concentration (“peak” level), or its lowest
that the most effective dosage can be determined,with (“trough” level). Occasionally called residual levels,
toxicity prevented. TDM is also utilized to identify non- trough levels show sufficient therapeutic levels; whereas
compliant patients (those patients who,for whatever rea- peak levels show poisoning(toxicity). Peak and trough
son,either cannot or will not comply with drug dosages levels should fall within the therapeutic range.
as prescribed by the physician).
Preparation
Precautions
In preparing for this test, the following guidelines
Because so many different factors influence blood
should be observed:
drug levels, the following points should be taken into
consideration during TDM: the age and weight of the •Depending on the drug to be tested, the physician
patient; the route of administration of the drug; the drug’s should decide if the patient is to be fasting(nothing
absorption rate,excretion rate,delivery rate,and dosage; to eat or drink for a specified period of hours) before
other medications the patient is taking; other diseases the the test.
patient has; the patient’s compliance regarding the drug •For patients suspected of symptoms of drug toxicity,
treatment regimen; and the laboratory methods used to the best time to draw the blood specimen is when the
test for the drug. symptoms are occurring.
•If there is a question as to whether an adequate dose of
Description the drug is being achieved, it is best to obtain trough
(lowest therapeutic concentration) levels.
TDM is a practical tool that can help the physician
provide effective and safe drug therapy in patients who •Peak (highest concentration) levels are usually obtained
need medication. Monitoring can be used to confirm a one to two hours after oral intake,approximately one
blood drug concentration level that is above or below the hour after intramuscular (IM) administration (a shot in
therapeutic range,or if the desired therapeutic effect of the muscle),and approximately 30 minutes after intra-
the drug is not as expected. If this is the case, and venous (IV) administration. Residual,or trough,levels
dosages beyond normal then have to be prescribed,TDM are usually obtained within 15 minutes of the next
can minimize the time that elapses. scheduled dose.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1107
Drug
therapy
monitoring
Risks make sure she has discussed the benefits and risks with
her physician.
Risks for this test are minimal, but may include
Oxytocin also may be used to control bleeding after
slight bleeding from the blood-drawing site,faintingor
delivery or to help make the milk flow in women who are
feeling lightheaded after blood is drawn,or accumulation
breastfeeding their babies.
of blood under the puncture site (hematoma).
Description
Resources
Oxytocin is a hormone and is available only with a
BOOKS
physician’s prescription. When used to start or continue
Lane,Keryn A. G. The Merck Manual of Medical Information.
labor,it is slowly injected into a vein. A nasal spray form
Merck Research Laboratories,1997.
is used to increase milk flow in breastfeeding. Some com-
Pagana,Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
monly used brand names are Pitocin and Syntocinon.
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis:Mosby,Inc.,1998.
Janis O. Flores Recommended dosage
The dosages given here are average doses. However,
doses may be different for different patients. Follow the
orders of the physician who prescribed the drug.
For increasing milk production:
Drugs used in labor
One spray into one or both nostrils, two to three
minutes before nursing or using a breast pump.
Definition
These drugs are used to induce (start) or continue labor. For starting or continuing labor:
The physician in charge will determine the appropri-
Purpose ate dose.
The drug decribed here,oxytocin,makes the uterus
Precautions
(womb) contract. Physicians use it to deliberately start
labor. Because there are some risks with using oxytocin, Oxytocin does not help increase or continue labor in
this should be done only when there are good medical all patients. When it does not help, the physician may
reasons. Any woman who is being given oxytocin should deliver the baby by cesarean section.
1108 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
robal
ni
desu
sgurD
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring: Therapeutic And Toxic Range
Drug Level* Use Therapeutic Level* Toxic
Aceteminophen mg/ml Analgesic, antipyretic Depends on use >250
Amikacin mg/ml Antibiotic 12–25 mg/ml** >25
Aminophylline ng/ml Bronchodilator 10–20 mg/ml >20
Amitriptyline ng/ml Antidepressant 120–150 ng/ml >500
Carbamazepine mg/ml Anticonvulsant 5–12 mg/ml >12
Chloramphenicol mg/ml Antibiotic 10–20 mg/ml >25
Digoxin ng/ml Cardiotonic 0.8–2.0 ng/ml >2.4
Gentamicin Antibiotic 4–12 mg/L >12 mg/L
Lidocaine Antiarrhythmic 1.5–5.0 mg/ml >5 mg/ml
Lithium mEq/L Antimanic 0.7–2.0 mEq/L >2.0
Nortriptyline ng/ml Antidepressant 50–150 ng/ml >500
Phenobarbital mg/ml Anticonvulsant 10–30 mg/ml >40
Phenytoin mg/ml Anticonvulsant 7–20 mg/ml >30
Procainamide mg/ml Antiarrhythmic 4–8 mg/ml >16
Propranolol ng/ml Antiarrhythmic 50–100 ng/ml >150
Quinidine mg/ml Antiarrhytmic 1–4 mg/ml >10
Theophylline mg/ml Bronchodilator 10–20 mg/ml >20
Tobramycin mg/ml Antibiotic 4–12 mg/ml** >12
Valproic acid mg/ml Anticonvulsant 50–100 mg/ml >100
* Values are laboratory-specific
**Concentration obtained 30 minutes after the end of a 30–minute infusion.
Description
KEY TERMS
Dry mouth due to the lack of saliva can be a serious
medical problem. Decreased salivation can make swal-
Cesarean section—The delivery of a baby through
lowing difficult, can decrease taste sensation, and can
a surgical procedure.
promote tooth decay.
Fetus—A developing baby inside the womb.
Hormone—A substance that is produced in one Causes and symptoms
part of the body, then travels through the blood- Dry mouth, resulting from thickened or reduced
stream to another part of the body where it has its salvia flow,can be caused by a number of factors:med-
effect. ications, both prescription and over-the-counter; sys-
temic diseases, such as anemia or diabetes, manifesta-
tions of Sjögren’s syndrome(as rheumatoid arthritis,
lupus,chronic hardening and thickening of the skin,or
In women who are especially sensitive to oxytocin, chronic and progressive inflammation of sketal muscles);
the drug may cause contractions to become too strong. infections of the salivary glands; blockage of the salivary
This could tear the uterus or deprive the fetus of blood ducts caused by stones or tumors forming in the ducts
and oxygen during labor. through which the saliva passes; dehydration; medical
Oxytocin does not help improve milk flow in all therapies, such as local surgery or radiation; secretion
women who are breastfeeding. Check with a physician if reduction normally involved in the aging proces; and
the drug does not seem to be working. emotional stress.
Women with heart disease,high blood pressure,or
Diagnosis
kidney disease should let their physicians know about
these conditions before taking oxytocin. Also, anyone The diagnosis of dry mouth is not difficult. The
who has had an unusual reaction to oxytocin in the past patient will state that his or her saliva is very thick or
should inform their physician. non-existent. Finding the cause of the dry mouth may be
more difficult and require some laboratory testing. Sali-
Side effects vary gland biopsy for stones or tumors should be per-
formed if indicated.
Oxytocin has caused irregular heartbeat and increased
bleeding in some women after delivery. It may also cause
Treatment
jaundice(yellowing of the eyes and skin) in newborns.
The treatment of dry mouth involves the manage-
Other side effects are rare,but may include nausea,
ment of the condition causing it. If dry mouth is caused
vomiting,confusion,dizziness,convulsions,breathing
by medication,the medication should be changed. If dry
problems,headache,hives,skin rash,itching,pelvic or
mouth is caused by blockage of the salivary ducts, the
abdominal pain, and weakness. The nasal spray form
cause of the blockage should be investigated. When sys-
may cause watery eyes or irritation of the nose.
temic diseases,such as diabetes and anemia,are brought
under control dry mouth problems may decrease.
Interactions
The use of caffeine-containing beverages,alcoholic
Anyone who takes oxytocin should let the physician
beverages,and mouthwashes containing alcohol should
know all other medicines she is taking.
be minimized. The drinking of water and fruit juices will
decrease dry mouth problems. Chewing gum and lemon
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
drops can be used to stimulate saliva flow. Bitters also
can initiate salivary flow as long as the salivary glands
and ducts are functional. Commercial saliva substitutes
are available without prescription and can be used as fre-
quently as needed. Use of a humidifier in the bedroom
Dry mouth
reduces nighttime oral dryness.
Definition
Prognosis
Dry mouth,known medically as xerostomia,is the
abnormal reduction of saliva due to medication,disease, The prognosis for patients with xerostomia due to
or medical therapy. medication problems is good,if the offending agent can
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1109
Dry
mouth
KEY TERMS Duodenal obstruction
Definition
Salivary duct—Tube through which saliva is car-
ried from the salivary gland to the mouth. Duodenal obstruction is a failure of food to pass out of
the stomach either from a complete or partial obstruction.
Salivary gland—Gland in which saliva forms.
Description
be changed. Dry mouth due to systemic problems may be The duodenum is the first part of the intestine,into
eliminated or improved once the disease causing the dry which the stomach, the gall bladder, and the pancreas
mouth is under control. Persistent xerostomia can be empty their contents. The pylorus connects the duode-
managed well with saliva substitutes. num with the stomach and contains the valve that regu-
lates stomach emptying. Obstruction usually occurs right
at this outlet, so that the gall bladder and pancreas are
unable to drain their secretions without hindrance.
Prevention
A patient needs to ask his or her health care
Causes and symptoms
provider if any medication to be prescribed will cause
dry mouth. Patients with persistent xerostomia need to Obstruction of the duodenum occurs in adults and
practice good oral hygieneand visit a dentist on a regu- infants,each for a different set of reasons. In adults,the
lar basis; the lack of adequate saliva can cause severe usual cause is a peptic ulcer of such antiquity that repeat-
dental decay. The salivary glands are very sensitive to ed cycles of injury and scarring have narrowed the pas-
radiation,so any patient scheduled for radiation thera- sageway. Medical treatment of ulcers has progressed to
pyof the head and neck needs to discuss with the radia- the point where such obstinate ulcer disease is rarely
tion therapist ways to minimize exposure of the salivary seen any more. In infants, the conditions are congeni-
glands to radiation. tal—either the channel is underdeveloped or the pylorus
is overdeveloped. The first type is called duodenal
hypoplasia and the second is termed hypertrophic
Resources pyloric stenosis. In rare cases,the channel may be miss-
BOOKS ing altogether,a condition called duodenal atresia. To say
Conn’s Current Therapy,1996.Ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadel- that these anomalies are congenital is not to say their
phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996. cause is understood. As with most birth defects,the spe-
Essential Otolaryngology.6th ed. Ed. K. Lee. Norwalk,CT: cific cause is not known.
Appleton & Lange.
Food that cannot exit the stomach in the forward
direction will return whence it came. Vomiting is the
ORGANIZATIONS
constant symptom of duodenal obstruction. It may be
American Dental Association. 211 E. Chicago Ave.,Chicago,
preceded by indigestion and nausea as the stomach
IL 60611. (312) 440-2500. <http://www.ada.org>.
attempts to squeeze its contents through an ever narrow-
American Medical Association. 515 N. State St.,Chicago,IL
ing outlet.
60612. (312) 464-5000. <http://www.ama-assn.org>.
Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis appears soon after
Joseph Knight,PA birth. The infant will vomit feedings,lose weight,and be
restless and irritable.
Dry skin see Ichthyosis
Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) Diagnosis
scan see Bone density test
X rays taken with contrast material in the stomach
readily demonstrate the site of the blockage and often the
DUB see Dysfunctional uterine bleeding
ulcer that caused it. Gastroscopy is another way to evalu-
Duchenne muscular dystrophy see ate the problem. In infants,x rays may not be necessary to
Muscular dystrophy detect pyloric stenosis. It is often possible to feel the
enlarged pylorus,like an olive,deep under the ribs and see
Duodenal atresia see Duodenal obstruction the stomach rippling as it labors to force food through.
1110 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitcurtsbo
lanedouD
Treatment
KEY TERMS
Bowel obstruction requires a surgeon, sometimes
immediately. Newer surgical techniques constantly
Atresia—Failure to develop; complete absence.
improve the outcome, but obstruction is a mechanical
problem that needs a mechanical solution. Most adults Contrast agent—A substance that produces shad-
who come to surgery for obstruction have suffered for ows on an x ray so that hollow structures can be
years from peptic ulcer disease. They will usually benefit more easily seen.
from ulcer surgeryat the same time their obstruction is
Gastroscopy—Looking into the stomach with a
relieved. The surgeon will therefore select a procedure
flexible viewing instrument called a gastroscope.
that combines relief of obstruction with remedy for ulcer
Hypoplasia—Incomplete development.
disease. There are many choices. In fact, even without
obstruction, functional considerations require ulcer Peptic ulcer—A wound in the lower stomach and
surgery to include enhancement of stomach emptying. duodenum caused by stomach acid and a newly
discovered germ called Helicobacter pylori.
To treat an infant with hypertrophic pyloric stenosis,
some surgeons have had success with forceful balloon
dilation of the pylorus done through a gastroscope,but
the standard procedure is to cut across the overdeveloped
“Pyloric Stenosis and Other Congenital Abnormalities of the
circular muscle that is constricting the stomach outlet.
Stomach.”In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics,ed. Richard
There are reports of infant hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
E. Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
remitting without surgery following a very careful feed-
Redel,Carol A.,and R. Jeff Zeiwner. “Anatomy and Anomalies
ing schedule,but mortality is unacceptably high.
of the Stomach and Duodenum.”In Sleisenger & Ford-
tran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feld-
Prognosis man,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
Wyllie,Robert. “Intestinal Atresia,Stenosis and Malrotation.”
A functioning and unrestricted intestine is a prereq-
In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics,ed. Richard E. Behrman.
uisite for living independent of the most advanced and
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
continuous medical care available. Achieving this desir-
able goal is the rule with surgery for duodenal obstruc- J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
tions of all types. The bowel is so malleable that there is
a rearrangement to suit every occasion. The variety of Duodenal stenosis see Duodenal
possible configurations is limited only by the surgeon’s
obstruction
imagination.
Duodenal ulcers see Ulcers (digestive)
Prevention Duodenum x rays see Hypotonic
duodenography
Prompt and effective treatment of peptic ulcers will
prevent chronic scarring and narrowing. Drugs devel- Duplicated ureter see Congenital ureter
oped over the past few decades have all but eliminated anomalies
the need for ulcer surgery.
Dwarfism see Achondroplasia; Pituitary
dwarfism
Resources
BOOKS
Barker,L. Randol,ed.,et al. Principles of Ambulatory Medi-
cine.Baltimore:Williams & Wilkins,1995.
Bennett,J. Claude,and Fred Plum,eds. Cecil Textbook of Med-
icine.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Dysfunctional uterine
Hay,William W.,ed.,et al. Current Pediatric Diagnosis and
Treatment.Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997. bleeding
McGuigan,James E. “Peptic Ulcer and Gastritis. In Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et Definition
al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is irregular,abnor-
McQuaid,Kenneth R. “Alimentary Tract.”In Current Medical
Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed. Stephen mal uterine bleeding that is not caused by a tumor,infec-
McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1995. tion,or pregnancy.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1111
Dysfunctional
uterine
bleeding
Description irregular bleeding. If the bleeding is heavy enough and
frequent enough,anemia can result.
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding (DUB) is a disorder
that occurs most frequently in women at the beginning Menorrhagia is representative of DUB. It is caused
and end of their reproductive lives. About half the cases by many conditions including some outside the repro-
occur in women over 45 years of age,and about one fifth ductive system. Causes of menorrhagia include:
occur in women under age 20. •adenomyosis (a benign condition characterized by
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is diagnosed when growths in the area of the uterus)
other causes of uterine bleeding have been eliminated. •imbalance between the hormones estrogen and proges-
Failure of the ovary to release an egg during the menstru- terone
al cycle occurs in about 70% of women with DUB. This
•fibroid tumors
is probably related to a hormonal imbalance.
•pelvic infection
DUB is common in women who have polycystic
ovary syndrome(cysts on the ovaries). Women who are •endometrial cancer (cancer of the inner mucous
on dialysis may also have heavy or prolonged periods. So membrane of the uterus)
do some women who use an intrauterine device (IUD)
•endometrial polyps
for birth control.
•endometriosis (a condition in which endometrial or
DUB is similar to several other types of uterine bleed-
endrometrial-like tissue appears outside of its normal
ing disorders and sometimes overlaps these conditions.
place in the uterus)
Menorrhagia •use of an intrauterine device (IUD) for contraception
•hypothyroidism
Menorrhagia,sometimes called hypermenorrhea,is
another term for abnormally long, heavy periods. This •blood clotting problems (rare)
type of period can be a symptom of DUB,or many other
•lupus erythematosus
diseases or disorders. In menorrhagia,menstrual periods
occur regularly,but last more than seven days,and blood •pelvic inflammatory disease
loss exceeds 3 oz (88.7 ml). Passing blood clots is com-
•steroid therapy
mon. Between 15–20% of healthy women experience
•advanced liver disease
debilitating menorrhagia that interferes with their normal
activities. Menorrhagia may or may not signify a serious •renal (kidney) disease
underlying problem.
•chemotherapy (cancer treatment with chemicals)
Metrorrhagia To diagnose dysfunctional uterine bleeding,many of
the potential causes mentioned above must be eliminat-
Metrorrhagia is bleeding between menstrual periods.
ed. When all potential causes connected with pregnancy,
Bleeding is heavy and irregular as opposed to ovulatory
infection,and tumors (benign or malignant) are eliminat-
spotting which is light bleeding,in mid-cycle,at the time
ed,then menorrhagia is presumed to be caused by dys-
of ovulation.
functional uterine bleeding.
Polymenorrhea
Diagnosis
Polymenorrhea describes the condition of having
too frequent periods. Periods occur more often than Diagnosis of any menstrual irregularity begins with
every 21 days,and ovulation usually does not occur dur- the patient herself. The doctor will ask for a detailed
ing the cycle. description of the problem, and take a history of how
long it has existed, and any patterns the patient has
observed. A woman can assist the doctor in diagnosing
Causes and symptoms
the cause of abnormal uterine bleeding by keeping a
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding often occurs when record of the time, frequency, length, and quantity of
the endometrium,or lining of the uterus,is stimulated to bleeding. She should also tell the doctor about any ill-
grow by the hormone estrogen. When exposure to estro- nesses,including long-standing conditions,like diabetes
gen is extended,or not balanced by the presence of prog- mellitus. The doctor will also inquire about sexual activ-
esterone,the endometrium continues to grow until it out- ity,use of contraceptives,current medications,and past
grows its blood supply. Then it sloughs off, causing surgical procedures.
1112 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gnideelb
eniretu
lanoitcnufsyD
Laboratory tests
KEY TERMS
After taking the woman’s history,the gynecologist
or family practitioner does a pelvic examination and Pap
Dilation and curettage (D & C)—A procedure
smear. To rule out specific causes of abnormal bleeding,
performed under anesthesia during which the
the doctor may also do a pregnancy test and blood tests
cervix is dilated, and tissue lining the uterus is to check the level of thyroid hormone. Based on the ini-
scraped out with a metal spoon-shaped instrument
tial test results,the doctor may want to do tests to deter-
or a suction tube. The procedure can be either
mine the level of other hormones that play a role in
diagnostic, or to remove polyps.
reproduction. A test of blood clotting time and an adrenal
function test are also commonly done. Endometrial biopsy—The removal of tissue either
by suction or scraping of samples of tissue from
Imaging the uterus. The cervix is not dilated. The procedure
has a lower rate of diagnostic accuracy than a D &
Imaging tests are important diagnostic tools for eval-
C, but can be done as an office procedure under
uating abnormal uterine bleeding. Ultrasound examina-
local anesthesia.
tion of the pelvic and abdominal area is used to help
Endometrial cancer—Cancer of the inner mucous
locate uterine fibroids,also called uterine leiomyoma,a
membrane of the uterus.
type of tumor. Visual examination through hysterscopy—
where a camera inside a thin tube is inserted directly into Fibroids, or fibroid tumors—Fibroid tumors are
the uterus so that the doctor can see the uterine lining—is non-cancerous (benign) growths in the uterus.
also used to assess the condition of the uterus. They occur in 30–40% of women over age 40,
and do not need to be removed unless they are
Hystersalpingography can help outline endometrial
causing symptoms that interfere with a woman’s
polyps and fibroids and help detect endometrial cancer.
normal activities.
In this procedure an x ray is taken after contrast media
has been injected into the cervix. Magnetic resonance Hypothyroidism—A disorder in which the thyroid
imaging(MRI) of the pelvic region can also be used to gland produces too little thyroid hormone causing
locate fibroids and tumors. a decrease in the rate of metabolism with associat-
ed effects on the reproductive system.
Invasive procedures Lupus erythematosus—A chronic inflammatory
disease in which inappropriate immune system
Endometrial biopsy(the removal and examination
reactions cause abnormalities in the blood vessels
of endometrial tissue) is the most important testing proce-
and connective tissue.
dure. It allows the doctor to sample small areas of the uter-
ine lining,while cervical biopsy allows the cervix to be Progesterone—A hormone naturally secreted by
sampled. Tissues are then examined for any abnormalities. the ovary, or manufactured synthetically, that
prepares the uterus for implantation of a fertil-
Dilation and curettage (D & C), once common is
ized egg.
rarely done today for diagnosis of DUB. It is done while
the patient is under either general or regional anesthesia. Prostaglandins—A group of chemicals that medi-
Women over 30 are more likely to need a D & C,as part ate, or determine the actions of other chemicals in
of the diagnostic procedure,than younger women. the cell or body.
Because DUB is diagnosed by eliminating other
possible disorders, diagnosis can take a long time and
involve many tests and procedures. Older women are
Otherwise the goal of treatment is to relieve the symp-
likely to need more extensive tests than adolescents
toms to a degree that uterine bleeding does not interfere
because the likelihood of reproductive cancers is greater
with a woman’s normal activities or cause anemia.
in this age group, and therefore must be definitively
eliminated before treating bleeding symptoms. Generally the first approach to controlling DUB is to
use oral contraceptivesthat provide a balance between
the hormones estrogen and progesterone. Oral contracep-
Treatment
tives are often very effective in adolescents and young
Treatment of DUB depends on the cause of the women in their twenties. NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-
bleeding and the age of the patient. When the underlying inflammatory drugs), like Naprosyn and Motrin, are
cause of the disorder is known,that disorder is treated. also used to treat DUB.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1113
Dysfunctional
uterine
bleeding
When bleeding cannot be controlled by hormone by removing the uterus,but this operation is not without
treatment,surgery may be necessary. Dilation and curet- risk,or the possibility of complications.
tage sometimes relieves the symptoms of DUB. If that
fails,endometrial ablation removes the uterine lining,but
Prevention
preserves a woman’s uterus. This procedure is sometimes
be used instead of hysterectomy. However,as it affects Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is not a preventable
the uterus,it can only be used when a woman has com- disorder.
pleted her childbearing years. The prescription of iron is
also important to decrease the risk of enemia. Resources
Until the 1980s, hysterectomy often was used to BOOKS
treat heavy uterine bleeding. Today hysterectomy is used DeCherney,Alan H.,and Martin L. Peroll. “Complications of
less frequently to treat DUB, and then only after other Menstruation.”In Current Obstetric and Gynecologic
methods of controlling the symptoms have failed. A hys- Diagnosis and Treatment.8th ed. Norwalk,CT:Appleton
terectomy leaves a woman unable to bear children,and, & Lange,1994.
therefore,is limited largely to women who are unable to, Murray,Michael T.,and Joseph E. Pizzorno. “Heavy Periods.”
In An Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine.Rocklin,CA:
or uninterested in,bearing children. Still,hysterectomy
Prima Publishing,1991.
is a common treatment for long-standing DUB in women
done with childbearing. OTHER
“Menorrhagia.”The wellness web <http://wellweb.com/
INDEX/MENORRHAGIA.htm>.
Alternative treatment
Alternative practitioners concentrate on good nutri- Tish Davidson
tionas a way to prevent heavy periods that are not caused
by uterine fibroids,endometrial polyps,endometriosis,or
cancer. Iron supplementation (100 mg per day) not only
helps prevent anemia,but also appears to reduce menor-
rhagia in many women. Other recommended dietary sup- Dyslexia
plements include vitaminsA and C. Vitamin C improves
Definition
capillary fragility and enhances iron uptake.
Vitamin E and bioflavonoid supplements are also Dyslexia is a learning disability characterized by
recommended. Vitamin E can help reduce blood flow, problems in reading,spelling,writing,speaking,or lis-
and bioflavonoids help strengthen the capillaries. Vita- tening. In many cases,dyslexia appears to be inherited.
min K is known to play a role in clotting and is helpful in
situations where heavy bleeding may be due to clotting Description
abnormalities
The word dyslexia is derived from the Greek word,
Botanical medicines used to assist in treating abnor-
dys (meaning poor or inadequate) and the word lexis
mal bleeding include spotted cranesbill (Geranium macu-
(meaning words or language).
latum), birthroot (Trillium pendulum), blue cohosh
The National Institutes of Health estimates that
(Caulophyllum thalictroides), witch hazel (Hamamelis
about 15% of the United States population is affected
virginiana),shepherd’s purse (Capsella bursa-pastoris),
by learning disabilities, mostly with problems in lan-
and yarrow (Achillea millifolia). These are all stiptic
guage and reading. The condition appears in all ages,
herbs that act to tighten blood vessels and tissue. Hor-
races,and income levels. Dyslexia is not a disease,but
monal balance can also be addressed with herbal formula-
describes rather a different kind of mind that learns in a
tions containing phytoestrogens and phytoprogesterone.
different way from other people. Many people with the
condition are gifted and very productive; dyslexia is not
Prognosis at all linked to low intelligence. In fact,intelligence has
nothing to do with dyslexia.
Response to treatment for DUB is highly individual
and is not easy to predict. The outcome depends largely Dyslexic children seem to have trouble learning
on the woman’s medical condition and her age. Many early reading skills,problems hearing individual sounds
women,especially adolescents,are successfully treated in words,analyzing whole words in parts,and blending
with hormones (usually oral contraceptives). As a last sounds into words. Letters such as “d”and “b”may be
resort,hysterectomy removes the source of the problem confused.
1114 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aixelsyD
When a person is dyslexic,there is often an unexpect- •confusion with opposites (up/down,early/late,and so on)
ed difference between achievement and aptitude. However,
•mathematics
each person with dyslexia has different strengths and weak-
nesses,although many have unusual talents in art,athletics,
architecture,graphics,drama,music,or engineering. These Causes and symptoms
special talents are often in areas that require the ability to
The underlying cause of dyslexia is not known,
integrate sight,spatial skills,and coordination.
although research suggests the condition is often inherit-
Often,a person with dyslexia has a problem translat- ed. In 1999,The Centre for Reading Research in Norway
ing language into thought (such as in listening or read- presented the first research to study the largest family
ing), or translating thought into language (such as in with reading problems ever known. By studying the read-
writing or speaking). ing and writing abilities of close to 80 family members
across four generations the researchers reported,for the
Common characteristics include problems with:
first time, that chromosome 2 can be involved in the
•identifying single words inheritability of dyslexia. When a fault occurs on this
gene it leads to difficulties in processing written lan-
•understanding sounds in words,sound order,or rhymes
guage. Previous studies have pointed out linkages of other
•spelling
potential dyslexia genes to chromosome 1,chromosome
•transposing letters in words 15 (DYX1 gene), and to chromosome 6 (DYX2 gene).
The researchers who pinpointed the newly localized gene
•handwriting
on chromosome 2 (DYX3) hope that this finding will lead
•reading comprehension
to earlier and more precise diagnoses of dyslexia.
•delayed spoken language
New research suggests a possible link with a subtle
•confusion with directions,or right/left handedness visual problem that affects the speed with which affected
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1115
Dyslexia
A student with dyslexia has difficulty copying words.(Photograph by Will & Deni McIntyre, Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced
by permission.)
Prognosis
KEY TERMS
Many successful and even famous people have
dyslexia. How well a person with dyslexia functions in
Spatial skills—The ability to locate objects in three
life depends on the way the disability affects that person.
dimensional world using sight or touch.
There is a great deal of variation among different people
with dyslexia,producing different symptoms and differ-
ent degrees of severity.
Prognosis is usually good if the condition is diag-
people can read. Other experts believe that dyslexia is
nosed early, and if the person has a strong self image
related to differences in the structure and function of the
with supportive family,friends,and teachers. It is imper-
brain that manifests differently in different people.
ative for a good outcome that the person be involved in a
good remedial program.
Diagnosis
Anyone who is suspected to have dyslexia should Resources
have a comprehensive evaluation, including hearing,
BOOKS
vision,and intelligence testing. The test should include
Davis,Ronald D.,and Eldon M. Braun. The Gift of Dyslexia:
all areas of learning and learning processes, not just
Why Some of the Smartest People Can’t Read and How
reading. They Can Learn.New York:Perigee,1997.
As further research pinpoints the genes responsible Guyer,Barbara P.,and Sally E. Shaywitz. The Pretenders:
Gifted People Who Have Difficulty Learning.Homewood:
for some cases of dyslexia,there is a possibility that ear-
High Tide Press,1997.
lier testing will be established to allow for timely inter-
ventions to prevent the onset of the condition and to treat PERIODICALS
it when it does occur. American Academy of Pediatrics,et al. “Learning Disabilities,
Dyslexia and Vision.”Pediatrics90 no.1 (1992):124-126.
Unfortunately,in many schools,a child is not identi-
Rumsey,J. M. “The Biology of Developmental Dyslexia.”
fied as having dyslexia until after repeated failures.
Journal of the American Medical Association268 no.7
(Aug. 19,1992):912-915.
Fagerheim,Toril,et al. “A New Gene (DYX3) for Dyslexia is
Treatment
Located on Chromosome 2.”Journal of Medical Genetics
If a child is diagnosed with dyslexia, the parents 36:(Sept. 1999):664-669.
should find out from the school or the diagnostician
ORGANIZATION
exactly what the problem is,and what method of teach- International Dyslexia Association (formerly the Orton Dyslex-
ing is recommended and why. No single method will ia Society). 8600 LaSalle Rd.,Chester Bldg.,Ste. 382,
work with every child,and experts often disagree as to Baltimore,MD 21286. (800) ABC-D123.
the best method to use. Learning Disabilities Association. 4156 Library Rd.,Pitts-
burgh,PA 15234. (412) 341-1515.
The primary focus of treatment is aimed at helping
the specific learning problem of each affected person. Beth Kapes
Most often,this may include modifying teaching meth-
ods and the educational environment, since traditional Dyslipidemia see Hyperlipoproteinemia
educational methods will not always work with a dyslex-
ic child.
People with dyslexia need a structured language pro-
gram,with direct instruction in the letter-sound system.
Dysmenorrhea
Teachers must give the rules governing written language.
Most experts agree that the teacher should emphasize the Definition
association between simple phonetic units with letters or
Dysmenorrhea is the occurrance of painful cramps
letter groups,rather than an approach that stresses mem-
during menstruation.
orizing whole words.
It is important to teach these students using all the
Description
senses:hearing,touching,writing,and speaking,provid-
ed by an instructor who is specifically trained in a pro- More than half of all girls and women suffer from
gram that is effective for dyslexic students. dysmenorrhea (cramps), a dull or throbbing pain that
1116 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aehrronemsyD
usually centers in the lower mid-abdomen, radiating
toward the lower back or thighs. Menstruating women of KEY TERMS
any age can experience cramps.
While the pain may be only mild for some women, Endometriosis—The growth of uterine tissue out-
others experience severe discomfort that can significant- side the uterus.
ly interfere with everyday activities for several days each Hormone—A chemical messenger secreted by a
month. gland and released into the blood, which allows it
to travel to distant cells where it exerts an effect.
Causes and symptoms
Ovary—One of the two almond-shaped glands in
Dysmenorrhea is called “primary”when there is no the female body that produces the hormones
specific abnormality,and “secondary”when the pain is estrogen and progesterone.
caused by an underlying gynecological problem. It is
Ovulation—The monthly release of an egg from
believed that primary dysmenorrhea occurs when hor-
an ovary.
mone-like substances called “prostaglandins”produced
Progesterone—The hormone produced by the
by uterine tissue trigger strong muscle contractions in the
ovary after ovulation that prepares the uterine lin-
uterus during menstruation. However, the level of
ing for a fertilized egg.
prostaglandins doesn’t seem to have anything to do with
how strong a woman’s cramps are. Some women have Uterus—The female reproductive organ that con-
high levels of prostaglandins and no cramps, whereas tains and nourishes a fetus from implantation until
other women with low levels have severe cramps. This is birth.
why experts assume that cramps must also be related to
other things (such as genetics,stress,and different body
types) in addition to prostaglandins. The first year or two of
a girl’s periods are not usually very painful. However,once Treatment
ovulation begins, the blood levels of the prostaglandins
Secondary dysmenorrhea is controlled by treating
rise,leading to stronger contractions.
the underlying disorder.
Secondary dysmenorrhea may be caused by endo-
metriosis,fibroid tumors,or an infection in the pelvis. Several drugs can lessen or completely eliminate
The likelihood that a woman will have cramps the pain of primary dysmenorrhea. The most popular
increases if she: choice are the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs),which prevent or decrease the formation of
•has a family history of painful periods
prostaglandins. These include aspirin, ibuprofen
•leads a stressful life
(Advil), and naproxen (Aleve). For more severe pain,
•doesn’t get enough exercise prescription strength ibuprofen (Motrin) is available.
•uses caffeine These drugs are usually begun at the first sign of the
period and taken for a day or two. There are many dif-
•has pelvic inflammatory disease
ferent types of NSAIDs,and women may find that one
Symptoms include a dull,throbbing cramping in the works better for them than the others.
lower abdomen that may radiate to the lower back and
thighs. In addition,some women may experience nausea If an NSAID is not available, acetaminophen
and vomiting,diarrhea,irritability,sweating,or dizzi- (Tylenol) may also help ease the pain. Heat applied to the
ness. Cramps usually last for two or three days at the painful area may bring relief,and a warm bath twice a
beginning of each menstrual period. Many women often day also may help. While birth control pills will ease the
notice their painful periods disappear after they have pain of dysmenorrhea because they lead to lower hor-
their first child, probably due to the stretching of the mone levels,they are not usually prescribed just for pain
opening of the uterus or because the birth improves the managementunless the woman also wants to use them
uterine blood supply and muscle activity. as a birth control method. This is because these pills may
carry other more significant side effects and risks.
Diagnosis
New studies of a drug patch containing glyceryl
A doctor should perform a thorough pelvic exam trinitrate to treat dysmenorrhea suggest that it also may
and take a patient history to rule out an underlying condi- help ease pain. This drug has been used in the past to
tion that could cause cramps. ease preterm contractions in pregnant women.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1117
Dysmenorrhea
Alternative treatment Adolescents.”American Journal of Obstetrics and Gyne-
cology174 (Apr. 1996):335-8.
Simply changing the position of the body can help McDonald,Claire,and Susan McDonald. “A Woman’s Guide
ease cramps. The simplest technique is assuming the to Self-care.”Natural Health(Jan. Feb. 1998):121-142.
fetal position, with knees pulled up to the chest while
ORGANIZATIONS
hugging a heating pad or pillow to the abdomen. Like-
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 409
wise, several yoga positions are popular ways to ease
12th Street,S.W.,PO Box 96920
menstrual pain. In the “cat stretch,”position,the woman
Federation of Feminist Women’s Health Centers.1469 Hum-
rests on her hands and knees,slowly arching the back.
boldt Rd,Suite 200,Chico,CA 96928. (530) 891-1911.
The pelvic tilt is another popular yoga position,in which
National Women’s Health Network. 514 10th St. NW,Suite
the woman lies with knees bent,and then lifts the pelvis
400,Washington,DC 20004. (202) 628-7814. <http://
and buttocks. www.womenshealthnetwork.org>.
Dietary recommendations to ease cramps include
increasing fiber, calcium, and complex carbohydrates, Carol A. Turkington
cutting fat,red meat,dairy products,caffeine,salt,and
Dysmetria see Movement disorders
sugar. Smokingalso has been found to worsen cramps.
Recent research suggests that vitamin B supplements,
primarily vitamin B in a complex,magnesium,and fish
6
oil supplements (omega-3 fatty acids) also may help
relieve cramps.
Other women find relief through visualization,con- Dyspepsia
centrating on the pain as a particular color and gaining
control of the sensations. Aromatherapyand massage Definition
may ease pain for some women. Others find that imagin-
Dyspepsia can be defined as painful,difficult,or dis-
ing a white light hovering over the painful area can actu-
turbed digestion,which may be accompanied by symp-
ally lessen the pain for brief periods.
toms such as nausea and vomiting,heartburn,bloat-
Exercise may be a way to reduce the pain of men- ing,and stomach discomfort.
strual cramps through the brain’s production of endor-
phins,the body’s own painkillers. And orgasm can make
Causes and symptoms
a woman feel more comfortable by releasing tension in
the pelvic muscles. The digestive problems may have an identifiable
Acupunctureand Chinese herbs are another popu- cause,such as bacterial or viral infection,peptic ulcer,
lar alternative treatments for cramps. gallbladder,or liver disease. The bacteria Helicobacter
pyloriis often found in those individuals suffering from
duodenal or gastric ulcers. Investigation of recurrent
Prognosis
indigestionshould rule out these possible causes.
Medication should lessen or eliminate pain.
Often,there is no organic cause for the problem,in
which case dyspepsia is classified as functional or nonul-
Prevention cer dyspepsia. There is evidence that functional dyspepsia
may be related to abnormal motility of the upper gastroin-
NSAIDs taken a day before the period begins should
testinal tract (a state known as dysmotility in which the
eliminate cramps for some women.
esophagus, stomach, and upper intestine behave abnor-
mally). These patients may respond to a group of drugs
Resources called prokinate agents. A review of eating habits (e.g.
BOOKS chewing with the mouth open, gulping food, or talking
Carlson,Karen J.,Stephanie Eisenstat,and Terra Ziporyn. The while chewing) may reveal a tendency to swallow air. This
Harvard Guide to Women’s Health.Cambridge,MA:Har- may contribute to feeling bloated,or to excessive belching.
vard University Press,1996. Smoking,caffeine,alcohol,or carbonated beverages may
contribute to the discomfort. When there is sensitivity or
PERIODICALS
allergy to certain food substances,eating those foods may
Hale,Ellen. “Taming Menstrual Cramps.”FDA Consumer25,
cause gastrointestinal distress. Some medications are asso-
no. 5 (June 1991):26-29.
Harel,Z.,et al. “Supplementation with Omega-3 Polyunsatu- ciated with indigestion. Stomach problems may also be a
rated Fatty Acids in the Management of Dysmenorrhea in response to stressor emotional unrest.
1118 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aispepsyD
KEY TERMS
Anemia—Diagnosed through laboratory study of
the blood, a deficiency in hemoglobin or red
blood cells, often associated with paleness or loss
of energy.
Endoscopy—A diagnostic procedure using a light-
ed instrument to examine a body cavity or internal
organ. Endoscopy permits collection of tissue and
culture specimens.
have irritable bowel syndrome, fewer than 1% of
patients had cancer,and the range for functional,or non-
ulcer dyspepsia (gastritisor superficial erosions),was
from 5–40%.
Diagnosis
Resources
A physical examination by a health care profes-
sional may reveal mid-abdominal pain. A rectal exami- BOOKS
nation may be done to rule out bleeding. If blood is Suddarth,Doris. The Lippincott Manual of Nursing Practice.
Philadelphia:J. B. Lippincott,1991.
found on rectal exam, laboratory studies, including a
blood count may be ordered. Endoscopy and barium PERIODICALS
studies may be used to rule out underlying gastrointesti- Goldfinger,S. E. “Sensitive Stomachs:Non-ulcer Dyspepsia.”
nal disease. Upper gastrointestinal x-ray studies using Harvard Health Letter(Jan. 1992):4-5.
barium may allow for visualization of abnormalities. Talley,N. J. “Non-ulcer Dyspepsia:Current Approaches to
Endoscopy permits collection of tissue and culture speci- Diagnosis and Management.”American Family Physician
(May 1993):1407-1416.
mens which may be used to further confirm a diagnosis.
OTHER
Treatment “Clinical Economics:Gastrointestinal Disease in Primary
Care.”23 Apr. 1998 <http://www.avicenna.com>.
The treatment of dyspepsia is based on assessment “Endoscopy for Dyspepsia.”4 Apr. 1998 <http://www.med
of symptoms and suspected causative factors. Clinical matrix.org>.
evaluation is aimed at distinguishing those patients who Graber,Mark A.,and Rhea Allen. University of Iowa Family
require immediate diagnostic work-ups from those who Practice Handbook.23 Apr. 1998 <http:www.vh.org
/providers/ClinRef/FPHandbook>.
can safely benefit from more conservative initial treat-
ment. Some of the latter may require only reassurance,
Kathleen D. Wright,RN
dietary modifications, or antacid use. Medications to
block production of stomach acids,prokinate agents,or
Dysphasia see Aphasia
antibiotic treatment may be considered. Further diagnos-
tic investigation is indicated if there is severe abdominal Dyspnea see Shortness of breath
pain,pain radiating to the back,unexplained weight loss,
Dysthymic disorder see Depressive
difficulty swallowing,a palpable mass,or anemia. Addi-
tional work-up is also indicated if a patient does not disorders
respond to prescribed medications.
Dystonia see Movement disorders
Prognosis
Statistics show an average of 20% of patients with
dyspepsia have duodenalor gastric ulcer disease, 20%
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1119
Dyspepsia
A false-color gamma scan of a human stomach with dys-
pepsia,or indigestion,during tests to study its rate of emp-
tying.(Photograph by Jean-Perrin, Custom Medical Stock
Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
E
E.coli see Escherichia coli examination. The ears may also be examined if an ear
infection is suspected due to fever,ear pain,or hearing
E.coli infection see Enterobacterial
loss. The patient will often be asked to tip the head
infections slightly toward the shoulder so the ear to be examined is
pointing up. The doctor or nurse may hold the ear lobe as
E.coli O157:H7 infection see Escherichia
the speculum is inserted into the ear,and may adjust the
coli
position of the otoscope to get a better view of the ear
Ear canal infection see Otitis externa canal and eardrum. Both ears are usually examined,even
if there seems to be a problem with just one ear.
Preparation
Ear exam with an otoscope No special preparation is required prior to an ear
examination with an otoscope. The ear speculum,which
Definition is inserted into the ear,is cleaned and sanitized before it
An otoscope is a hand-held instrument with a tiny is used. The speculums come in various sizes, and the
light and a cone-shaped attachment called an ear specu- doctor or nurse will select the size that will be most com-
lum, which is used to examine the ear canal. An ear fortable for the patient’s ear.
examination is a normal part of most physical examina-
tions by a doctor or nurse. It is also done when an ear
Aftercare
infection or other type of ear problem is suspected.
If an ear infection is diagnosed, the patient may
Purpose require treatment with antibiotics. If there is a buildup of
wax in the ear canal,it might be rinsed or scraped out.
An otoscope is used to look into the ear canal to see
the ear drum. Redness or fluid in the eardrum can indi-
cate an ear infection. Some otoscopes can deliver a small
Risks
puff of air to the eardrum to see if the eardrum will
vibrate (which is normal). This type of ear examination This type of ear examination is simple and generally
with an otoscope can also detect a build up of wax in the harmless. Caution should always be used any time an
ear canal,or a rupture or puncture of the eardrum. object is inserted into the ear. This process could irritate
an infected external ear canal and could rupture an
eardrum if performed improperly or if the patient moves.
Precautions
No special precautions are required. However,if an
ear infection is present, an ear examination may cause Normal results
some discomfort or pain.
The ear canal is normally skin-colored and is cov-
ered with tiny hairs. It is normal for the ear canal to have
Description
some yellowish-brown earwax. The eardrum is typically
An ear examination with an otoscope is usually done thin,shiny,and pearly-white to light gray in color. The
by a doctor or a nurse as part of a complete physical tiny bones in the middle ear can be seen pushing on the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1121
deformities of the ear’s auditory tube,middle ear,inner
KEY TERMS ear,and auditory and vestibular systems. Ear surgery is
commonly performed to treat conductive hearing loss,
Ear speculum—A cone- or funnel-shaped attach- persistent ear infections,unhealed perforated eardrums,
ment for an otoscope which is inserted into the ear congenital ear defects,and tumors.
canal to examine the eardrum. Ear surgery is performed on children and adults. In
Otoscope—A hand-held instrument with a tiny some cases,surgery is the only treatment; in others,it is
light and a funnel-shaped attachment called an used only when more conservative medical treatment fails.
ear speculum, which is used to examine the ear
canal and eardrum.
Precautions
The precautions vary,depending on the type ofear
surgery under consideration. For example,stapedecto-
eardrum membrane like tent poles. The light from the my(removal of parts of the middle ear and insertion of
otoscope will reflect off of the surface of the ear drum. prosthesis parts) should not be performed on people with
external or middle ear infection or inner ear disease. For
Abnormal results people with complete hearing loss in the other ear, it
should be performed cautiously. Microsurgery for the
An ear infection will cause the eardrum to look red
removal of a cholesteatoma (a cyst-like mass of cells in
and swollen. In cases where the eardrum has ruptured,
the middle ear) should not be performed on patients who
there may be fluid draining from the middle ear. A doctor
are extremely ill or have other medical conditions. Tym-
may also see scarring, retraction of the eardrum, or
panoplasty (any surgical procedure on the eardrum or
bulging of the eardrum.
middle ear) should not be performed on patients with
chronic sinus or nasal problems or in some patients with
Resources medical problems such as poorly controlled diabetes and
ORGANIZATIONS heart disease. Surgery for congenital microtia and atresia
American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck (abscense of normal bodily openings,such as the outer
Surgery,Inc. One Prince St.,Alexandria VA 22314-3357. ear canal) should not be performed if the middle ear
(703) 836-4444. <http://www.entnet.org>. space is totally or almost totally absent.
Ear Foundation. 1817 Patterson St.,Nashville,TN 37203.
(800) 545-4327. <http://www.earfoundation.org>.
Hearing Health Information. 2100 W. 3rd St.,Los Angeles,CA Description
90057. (213) 483-4431.
Most ear surgery is microsurgery,performed with an
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Dis-
operating microscope to enable the surgeon to view the
orders. National Institutes of Health,31 Center Drive,
very small structures of the ear. The use of minimally
MSC 2320,Bethesda,MD USA 20892-2320. (800) 241-
1044. <http://www.nidcd.nih.gov>. invasive laser surgery for middle ear procedures is
growing. Laser surgery reduces the amount of trauma
OTHER
due to vibration,enhances coagulation,and enables sur-
“Ear Test.”HealthAnswers.com.<http://www.healthanswers.com>.
geons to access hard to reach places in the middle ear.
Altha Roberts Edgren Laser surgery can be performed in an office operating
suite. Types of ear surgery include stapedectomy,tym-
panoplasty, myringotomy and ear tube surgery, ear
surgery to repair a perforated eardrum, cochlear
implants,and tumor removal.
Ear surgery
Stapedectomy
Definition
To restore hearing loss,which is usually due to oto-
Ear surgery is the treatment of diseases,injuries,or
sclerosis,stapedectomy is performed. Stapedectomy is
deformations of the ear by operation with instruments.
the removal of all or part of the stapes,one of the bones in
the middle ear,and replacement with a tiny prosthesis. An
Purpose
incision is made in the middle ear, the small bones are
Ear surgery is performed to correct certain types of identified,and the stapes is removed. The stainless steel
hearing loss, and to treat diseases of, injuries to, or wire and cellulose sponge prosthesis is inserted, blood
1122 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yregrus
raE
and fluid are drained,and the wound is closed. Performed
in a hospital or outpatient surgical facility under local or
general anesthetic,full recovery takes about three weeks
but hearing should improve immediately.
Tympanoplasty
Tympanoplasty is performed to reconstruct the
eardrum after partial or total conductive hearing loss,
usually caused by chronic middle ear infections,or per-
forations that do not heal. This is usually a same day
surgery,performed under either local or general anesthe-
sia. After making an incision in the ear to view the perfo-
ration,the ear drum is elevated away from the ear canal
and lifted forward. If the bones of hearing (ossicular
chain) are functioning,tissue is taken from the ear and
grafted to the eardrum to close the perforation. A thin
sheet of silastic and Gelfoam hold the graft in place. The
ear is stitched together,and a sterile patch is placed on
home the same day; children under three years of age and
the outside of the ear canal. Tympanoplasty is successful
those with chronic diseases usually stay overnight.
in over 90% of all cases. The need for ossicular recon-
struction (reconstruction of tiny bones of the middle ear)
Ear surgery for a perforated eardrum
is sometimes known before surgery and and even when
identified during surgery, can usually be done while Ear surgery for a perforated eardrum is only per-
reconstructing the eardrum. If the gap between the anvil formed in rare cases where it does not heal on its own. In
bone and the stapes is small,a small piece of bone or car- most cases,this is performed in a surgeon’s office using a
tilage from the patient can be inserted; if is is large,the topical anesthetic. The surgeon scratches the undersur-
incus bone is removed,modelled into a prosthesis,and face of the eardrum,stimulating the skin to heal and the
reinserted between the stapes and the malleus. Recon- eardrum to close. A thin patch placed on the eardrum’s
struction could also be achieved by inserting a strut made outer surface allows the skin under the eardrum to heal.
from artificial bone. For tympanoplasty with ossicular
reconstruction,the patient usually stays in the hospital Cochlear implants
overnight. The recovery period is about four weeks.
Cochlear implants stimulate nerve ends within the
inner ear,enabling deaf children to hear. The device has a
Myringotomy and ear tube surgery microphone that remains outside the ear,a processor that
selects and codes speech sounds,and a receiver/stimulator
Myringotomy and ear tube surgery is performed to
to convert the coded sounds to electric signals that stimulate
drain ear fluid and prevent ear infections when antibi-
the hearing nerve and are recognized by the brain as sound.
oticsdon’t work or when ear infections are chronic. The
During surgery, an incision is made behind and slightly
process normalizes pressure in the middle ear and
above the ear. A circular hole is drilled in the bone to receive
decreases fluid accumulation. It is most commonly per-
the device’s internal coil. The mastoid bone leading to the
formed on infants and children,in whom ear infections
middle ear is opened to receive the electrodes. The internal
are most frequent,and may be done on one or both ears.
coil is inserted and secured,followed by the electrodes. The
The surgeon makes a small hole in the ear drum, then
wound is stitched up and when it heals, an external unit
uses suction to remove fluid. A small ear tube of metal or
comprised of a stimulator with a microphone is worn
plastic is inserted into the ear drum to allow continual
behind the ear. Performed in a hospital under general anes-
drainage. The tube prevents infections as long as it stays
thesia, the operation takes about two hours and usually
in place, which varies from six months to three years.
requires a hospital stay overnight. The patient can resume
When the tube falls out,the hole grows over. As many of
normal activities in two to three weeks.
25% of children under the age of two who need ear tubes
may need them again. Myringotomy and ear tube surgery
Ear surgery for tumors
is performed in a hospital,using a general anesthetic for
most children and a local anesthetic for older children or Some ear tumors can be very serious and should be
adults. No anesthetic may be used for infants. The proce- removed surgically. For a tumor on the skin of the ear
dure usually takes about two hours. Most patients can go canal,the skin is removed surgically,the bone beneath it
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1123
Ear
surgery
Microsurgery being performed in the inner ear.(Photograph
by Hans Halberstadt, Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by
permission.)
Preparation
KEY TERMS
The preparation depends upon the type of ear
surgery performed. For many procedures, blood and
Auditory—Relating to the sense of the organs of
urine studies and hearing tests are conducted.
hearing.
Cholesteatoma—A cystic mass of cells in the mid- Aftercare
dle ear, occurring as a congential defect or as a
The type of aftercare depends upon the type of
serious complication of a disease or traumtic con-
surgery performed. In most cases, the ear(s) should be
dition of the ear.
kept dry and warm. Non-prescription drugs such as
Otologic—Relating to the study, diagnosis, and acetaminophencan be used for pain.
treatment of diseases of the ear and related struc-
tures.
Risks
The type of risk depends on the type of surgery per-
formed. Total hearing loss is rare.
is drilled away,and a skin graft is placed in the ear canal.
If the tumor is near the eardrum,the skin of the ear canal
Resources
and the eardrum are removed along with the bone sur-
BOOKS
rounding the ear canal. A skin graft is placed on the bare
“Ear,Nose & Throat.”In Current Medical Diagnosis and
bone. For basal cell cancers and low grade glandular
Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al.
malignancies,surgical resection of the ear canal is ade-
Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1995.
quate. Squamous cell carcinoma,a serious form of can-
cer,of the external ear canal requires radical surgery,fol- PERIODICALS
lowed by radiation therapy. Cholesteatoma,a benign “Avoiding Ear Surgery.”Mothering(July/Aug. 1997):44.
Nissen,Alan J. “Laser Applications in Otologic Surgery.”Ear,
tumor caused by an infection in a perforated eardrum that
Nose & Throat Journal74 (July 1995):477.
did not heal properly and can destroy the bones of hear-
Silverstein,Herbert,and Seth I. Rosenberg. Ear,Nose &
ing, is removed with microsurgery. Mastoidectomy is
Throat Journal76 (Sept. 1997):674.
performed for mastoiditis,an inflammation of the mid-
dle ear,if medical therapy does not work. Petrous apicec- ORGANIZATIONS
tomy is performed to drain the petrous apicitis,the bone American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery,Inc. One Prince St.,Alexandria VA 22314-3357.
between the middle ear and the clivis.
(703) 836-4444. <http://www.entnet.org>.
American Hearing Research Foundation. 55 E. Washington St.,
Ear surgery for congenital ear defects Suite 2022,Chicago,IL 60602. (312) 726-9670. <http://
Congenital atresia, the absence of the external ear www.american-hearing.org/>.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 10801
canal,and congenital microtia,abnormal growth of the
Rockville Pike,Rockville,MD 20852. (800) 638-8255.
external ear, often occur together, although atresia can
<http://www.asha.org>.
occur without microtia. Surgery to reconstruct the ear
usually takes place when the child is four or five years old OTHER
and may require several operations. A facial plastic sur- “Ears:Entrance to the Everyday World of Hearing and Bal-
geon and an ear surgeon work together, repairing the ance.”The Ear Surgery Information Center.31 May 1998
<http://206.0.212.22/INDEX.html>.
microtia first and then the atresia. During surgery,a bony
“Ear Infections and Ear Tube Surgery.”KidsHealth.org.1997.
opening is created over the bones of hearing. The surfaces
31 May 1998 <http://kidshealth.org/parent/health/ear_
of the bony ear canal are then relined with a skin graft
infections.html>.
from the thigh or abdomen. Tissue from behind the
“Myringotomy; Ear Infection,Middle (Otitis Media); Eardrum,
eardrum is used to create a new eardrum. In many cases,
Ruptured; Staples Removal; Tympanoplasty; and
the middle ear will also need to be reconstructed. Surgery Cochlear Implant.”ThriveOnline.28 May 1998 <http://
is performed in a hospital under general anesthesia. thriveonline.oxygen.com>.
Other types of ear surgery Lori De Milto
Surgery may also be appropriate to remove multiple
Ear tubes see Myringotomy and ear tubes
bony overgrowths of the ear canal or in rare cases of
compromised auditory tube function,to narrow the tube. Ear wax impaction see Cerumen impaction
1124 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yregrus
raE
Eardrum perforation see Perforated eardrum nacea pallida. The entire plant has numerous medicinal
properties that act synergistically to good effect. Echi-
Eastern equine encephalitis see Arbovirus
nacea is most often used to boost the immune system and
encephalitis fight infection. Research has shown that echinacea
increases production of interferon in the body. It is anti-
Eating disorders see Anorexia nervosa;
septic and antimicrobial, with properties that act to
Bulimia nervosa
increase the number of white blood cells available to
Eaton agent pneumonia see Mycoplasma destroy bacteria and slow the spread of infection. As a
infections depurative, the herbal extract cleanses and purifies the
bloodstream,and has been used effectively to treat boils.
Ebola virus infection seeHemorrhagic fevers
Echinacea is vulnerary,promoting wound healing through
Ecchymosis see Bruises the action of a chemical substance in the root known as
caffeic acid glycoside. As an alterative and an immuno-
ECG see Electrocardiography
modulator,echinacea acts gradually to promote beneficial
change in the entire system. It has also been used to treat
urinary infection and Candida albicansinfections. Echi-
nacea is a febrifuge,useful in reducing fevers. It is also
useful in the treatment of hemorrhoids. A tincture,or a
Echinacea strong decoction of echinacea serves as an effective
mouthwash for the treatment of pyorrhea and gingivitis.
Definition
Native American plains Indians relied on echinacea
Echinacea,or purple coneflower,is a perennial herb as an all-purpose antiseptic. The Sioux tribe valued the
of the Composite family,commonly known as the daisy root as a remedy for snake bite, the Cheyenne tribe
family. Most often referred to as the purple coneflower, chewed the root to quench thirst, and another tribe
this hardy plant also known as Sampson root,Missouri washed their hands in a decoction of echinacea to
snakeroot, and rudbeckia. The prominent, bristly seed increase their tolerance of heat. European settlers learned
head inspired the generic name of the plant,taken from of the North American herb’s many uses, and soon
the Greek word echinosmeaning hedgehog. numerous echinacea-based remedies were commercially
available from pharmaceutical companies in the United
Description States. Echinacea was a popular remedy in the United
States through the 1930s. It was among many medicinal
Echinacea is a North American prairie native,abun-
herbs listed in the U.S. Pharmacopoeia,the official Unit-
dant in the Midwest,and cultivated widely in ornamental
ed States government listing of pharmaceutical raw
and medicinal gardens. The purple-pink rays of the blos-
materials and recipes. The herb fell out of popular use in
som droop downward from a brassy hued center cone
the United States with the availability of antibiotics. In
composed of many small,tubular florets. The conspicu-
West Germany,over 200 preparations are made from the
ous flowers bloom singly on stout, prickly stems from
species E. purpurea. Commercially prepared salves,tinc-
mid-summer to autumn. Flower heads may grow to 4 in
tures,teas,and extracts are marketed using standardized
(10.16 cm) across. The dark green leaves are opposite,
extracts. Echinacea is regaining its status in the United
entire,lanceolate,toothed,and hairy with three promi-
States as a household medicine-chest staple in many
nent veins. The narrow upper leaves are attached to the
homes. It is one of the best-selling herbal supplements in
stem with stalks. The lower leaves are longer,emerging
United States health food stores.
from the stem without a leaf stalk,and growing to 8 in
(20.32 cm) in length. The plant develops deep,slender, Clinical studies have found that the entire plant pos-
black roots. Echinacea propagates easily from seed or by sesses medicinal properties with varying levels of effec-
root cuttings. However,due to its increasing popularity tiveness. Echinacea is of particular benefit in the treatment
as an herbal supplement,echinacea is numbered among of upper respiratory tract infections. Some research has
the 19 medicinal plants considered at risk by the Vermont shown that echinacea activates the macrophages that
nonprofit organization,United Plant Savers. destroy cancercells and pathogens. When taken after can-
cer treatments, an extract of the root has been found to
increase the body’s production of white blood cells. Echi-
Purpose
nacea has been shown to be most effective when taken at
Three species of echinacea are useful medicinally: the first sign of illness,rather than when used as a daily
Echinacea augustifolia,Echinacea purpurea,and Echi- preventative. Other research has demonstrated the signifi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1125
Echinacea
dried herb. Steep in 1 pt (0.47 l) of boiled,unchlorinated
KEY TERMS water for 10–15 minutes. Strain and cover. Drink warm,
sweetened with honey if desired. A standard dose is three
Alterative—A medicinal substance that acts grad- cups per day. An infusion will keep for up to two days in
ually to nourish and improve the system. the refrigerator and retain its healing qualities.
Antimicrobial—A plant substance that acts to A tincture is the usual method to prepare a concen-
inhibit the growth of harmful microorganisms, or trated form of the herbal remedy. Tinctures,properly pre-
acts to destroy them. pared and stored,will retain medicinal potency for two
years or more. Combine 4 oz (114 g) of finely cut fresh
Febrifuge—A plant substance that acts to prevent
or powdered dry herb with 1 pt (0.47 l) of brandy,gin,or
or reduce fever.
vodka in a glass container. The alcohol should be enough
Glycoside—An herbal carbohydrate that exerts to cover the plant parts and have a 50/50 ratio of alcohol
powerful effect on hormone-producing tissues. to water. Place the mixture away from light for about two
The glycoside breaks down into a sugar and a weeks,shaking several times each day. Strain and store
non-sugar component. in a tightly capped,dark glass bottle. A standard dose is
Lanceolate—Narrow, leaf shape that is longer 0.14 oz (4 ml ) of the tincture three times a day.
than it is wide, and pointed at the end.
Precautions
Macrophage—Specialized cells present throughout
the lymphoid tissues of the body that circulate in the Echinacea is considered safe in recommended doses.
bloodstream. Macrophages have a surface marker Pregnant or lactating women,however,are advised not to
that stimulates other cells to react to an antigen. take echinacea in injection form. Because the plant has
proven immuno-modulating properties,individuals with
systemic lupus erythmatosus, rheumatoid arthritis,
tuberculosis, leukemia, multiple sclerosis, or AIDS
cant effect of E. purpurearoot on reducing the duration should consult their physician before using echinacea.
and severity of colds and flu. Some herbal references list Echinacea should not be given to children under two
only the root as the medicinal part,others include the aeri- years of age,and it should only be given to children over
al parts of the plant, particularly the leaf. But research two in consultation with a physician. Research indicates
studies in Europe and the United States have concluded that echinacea is most effective when taken at first onset
that the entire plant is medicinally effective. Most research of symptoms of cold or flu,and when usage is continued
has been done on the species E. pallidaand E. purpurea. no longer than eight weeks. There is some indication that
All three species of echinacea are rich in vitamins and the herb loses its effectiveness when used over a long
minerals. Echinacea is an herbal source of niacin,chromi- period of time. It is necessary to interrupt use for a mini-
um,iron,manganese,selenium,silicon,and zinc. mum of several weeks in order to give the body’s
immune system the opportunity to rest and adjust.
Preparations
Side effects
The quality of any herbal supplement depends great-
ly on the conditions of weather and soil where the herb No side effects are reported with oral administration
was grown, the timing and care in harvesting, and the of echinacea,either in tincture,capsule,or as a tea,when
manner of preparation and storage. taken according to recommended doses. Chills, fever,
and allergic reactions have been reported in some
Decoction is the best method to extract the mineral
research studies using an injection of the plant extract.
salts and other healing components from the coarser herb
materials,such as the root,bark,and stems. It is prepared
Interactions
by adding 1 oz (28.4 g) of the dried plant materials,or 2
oz (56.7 g) of fresh plant parts,to 1 pt (0.47 l) of pure, None reported. When used in combination with
unchlorinated,boiled water in a non-metallic pot. Sim- other herbs,dosage should be lowered.
mer for about one half hour. Strain and cover. A decoc-
tion may be refrigerated for up to two days and retain its
Resources
healing qualities.
BOOKS
An infusion is the method used to derive benefits
Foster,Steven,and James A. Duke. A Field Guide to Medicinal
from the leaves, flowers, and stems in the form of an Plants.New York:The Peterson Field Guide Series,
herbal tea. Use twice as much fresh, chopped herb as Houghton Mifflin Company,1990.
1126 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aecanihcE
Hoffmann,David. The New Holistic Herbal.Massachusetts:
Element Books Inc.,1986. KEY TERMS
Kowalchik,Claire,and William H. Hylton,eds. Rodale’s Illus-
trated Encyclopedia of Herbs.Pennsylvania:Rodale Press
Allergenic—A substance capable of causing an
Inc.,1987.
allergic reaction.
McIntyre,Anne. The Medicinal Garden.Henry Holt and Com-
pany Inc.,1997. Cholangitis—Infection or inflammation of the bile
Official Proceedings. Medicines from the Earth,Protocols for ducts; often causes abdominal pain, fever, and
Botanical Healing.Massachusetts:Gaia Herbal Research jaundice.
Institute,1996.
Computed tomography (CT) scan—A specialized
Ondra,Nancy,ed. “200 Herbal Remedies.”In The Complete
Book of Natural & Medicinal Cures.Pennsylvania: x-ray procedure in which cross-sections of the
Rodale Press Inc.,1994. area in question can be examined in detail.
Weed,Susun S. Wise Woman Ways,Menopausal Years.New
Cyst—A protective sac that includes either fluid or
York:Ash Tree Publishing,1992.
the cell of an organism. The cyst enables many
PERIODICALS organisms to survive in the environment for long
Deneen,Sally,and Tracey C. Rembert. “Stalking Medicinal periods of time without need for food or water.
Plants,An International Trade Imperils Wild Herbs.”E
Embryo—The very beginning stages of develop-
Magazine(July/Aug. 1999).
ment of an organism.
OTHER
Jaundice—The yellow-greenish coloring of the
Herb World News Online,Research Reviews.1999. Herb
skin and eyes due to the presence of bile pig-
Research Foundation. <http://www.herbs.org>.
ments. The presence of jaundice is usually, but not
always, a sign of liver disease.
Clare Hanrahan
Tapeworm—An intestinal parasite that attaches to
the intestine or travels to other organs such as the
liver and lungs.
Ultrasound—A noninvasive procedure based on
Echinococcosis changes in sound waves of a frequency that can-
not be heard, but respond to changes in tissue
Definition composition.
Echinococcosis (Hydatid disease) refers to human
infection by the immature (larval) form of tapeworm,
Echinococcus. One of three forms of the Echinococcus
spp., E. granulosus, lives on dogs and livestock, and the world,but control programs have decreased the rate
infects humans through contact with these animals. Aller- of infection in some regions. In Kenya alone,the num-
gic reactions and damage to various organs from cyst for- bers of persons infected each year is as high as 220 per
mation are the most common forms of disease in humans. 100,000 population.
Description Causes and symptoms
E. granulosus is found in many areas of Africa, After ingestion,the eggs develop into embryos with-
China, South America, Australia, New Zealand, and in the intestines and then travel to the liver and lungs
Mediterranean and eastern Europe,as well as in parts of through major blood vessels. The embryos then begin to
the western United States. The parasite lives in regions form cysts within the liver and lungs,causing damage as
where dogs and livestock cohabitate. Direct exposure to they enlarge over a period of five to 20 years. Cysts may
infectious dogs as well as parasitic eggs released into the become over 8 in (20.3 cm)or more in size and contain a
environment during shedding are both sources of human huge amount of highly allergenic fluid. Studies show that
infection. while the liver is most often targeted,lungs,brain,heart,
and bone can also be affected.
In humans,cysts containing the larvae develop after
ingestion of eggs. Cysts form primarily in the lungs and The major symptoms are due to compression dam-
liver. Cysts developing in the liver are responsible for age, blockage of vessels and ducts (such as the bile
about two-thirds of echinococcosis cases. Echinococco- ducts), and leakage of fluid from cysts. The following
sis is a significant public health problem in many areas of symptoms are frequent.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1127
Echinococcosis
•Liver involvement causes painand eventually jaundice with spread or allergic reactions. Recent studies using
or cholangitisdue to blockage of bile ducts. Infection medication alongside aspiration and drainage of cysts
of cysts leads to abscesses in up to 20%. instead of surgery are very encouraging.
•Lung cysts cause coughand chest pain. The medication albenzadole can be taken before or
•Bone cysts cause fracturesand damage to bone tissue. after surgery or alone without surgery. However, its
effectiveness as a single treatment is still not known.
•Heart involvement leads to irregularities of heart beat
Multiple courses of medication are often necessary,
and inflammation of the covering of the heart (peri-
with cure rates of only about 30%. Response to treat-
cardium).
ment is best monitored by serial CT scans or similar x-
•Allergic reactions occur from leakage of cyst fluid that ray studies.
contains antigens. Itching,fever,and rashesare fre-
quent,and fatal allergic reactions (anaphylaxis) have
been reported. Eosinophils, which are blood cells Prevention
involved in allergic reactions, are increased in many
Good hand washing,treating infected dogs,and pre-
patients.
venting dogs access to slaughter houses discourage
spread of the disease. Limiting the population of stray
Diagnosis dogs has also been helpful.
X rays,computed tomography scans(CT scans),
and ultrasound are very helpful in detecting cysts. Some
Resources
cysts will develop characteristic hardening of organ tis-
sues from calcium deposits (calcifications). Blood tests BOOKS
to detect antibodies are useful when positive,but up to Chung,Raymond T.,and Lawrence S. Friedman. “Echinococ-
50% of patients have negative results. Examination of cus.”In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and
Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W.
aspirated cyst fluid for parasites can be diagnostic,but
B. Saunders Co.,1997.
carries the danger of a fatal allergic reaction. Treatment
Nutman,Thomas B.,and Peter F. Weller. “Echinococcosis.”In
with anti-parasitic medications before aspiration is
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony
reported to decrease allergic complications and decrease
S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
the risk of spread during the procedure.
PERIODICALS
Treatment Ammann,Rudolph W.,and Johannes Eckert. “Echinococcus.”
Gastroenterology Clinics of North America(Sept. 1996):
Treatment depends on the size and location of cysts,
655-689.
as well as the symptoms they are producing. Surgical
Khuroo,Mohammad,et al. “Percutaneous Drainage Compared
removal of cysts and/or surrounding tissue is the accept- with Surgery for Hepatic Hydatid Cysts.”New England
ed method of treatment,but carries a risk of cyst rupture Journal of Medicine337 (25 Sept. 1997):881-87.
1128 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisoccoconihcE
Uterus with eggs Sucker
Echinococcus granulosus
Infection with the larva of Echinococcus granulosus(shown above) is responsible for the disease echinococcosis.(Illustra-
tion by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
OTHER
“Alveolar Hydatid Disease (Echinococcosis).”Centers for Dis-
ease Control.28 May 1998 <http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/
dpd/ahd.htm>.
“Percutaneous Drainage Compared with Surgery for Hepatic
Hydatid Cysts.”New England Journal of Medicine
Online.<http://content.nejm.org>.
David Kaminstein,MD
Echinococcus granulosus infection see
Echinococcosis
Echocardiography
Description
Definition
Echocardiography creates an image of the heart
Echocardiography is a diagnostic test that uses ultra-
using ultra-high-frequency sound waves—sound waves
sound waves to create an image of the heart muscle.
that are too high in frequency to be heard by the human
Ultrasound waves that rebound or echo off the heart can
ear. The technique is very similar to ultrasound scanning
show the size,shape,and movement of the heart’s valves
commonly used to visualize the fetus during pregnancy.
and chambers as well as the flow of blood through the
heart. Echocardiography may show such abnormalities An echocardiography examination generally lasts
as poorly functioning heart valves or damage to the heart between 15–30 minutes. The patient lies bare-chested on
tissue from a past heart attack. an examination table. A special gel is spread over the
chest to help the transducer make good contact and slide
Purpose smoothly over the skin. The transducer,a small hand-held
device at the end of a flexible cable,is placed against the
Echocardiography is used to diagnose certain cardio-
chest. Essentially a modified microphone,the transducer
vascular diseases. In fact,it is one of the most widely used
directs ultrasound waves into the chest. Some of the
diagnostic tests for heart disease. It can provide a wealth
waves get echoed (or reflected) back to the transducer.
of helpful information,including the size and shape of the
Since different tissues and blood all reflect ultrasound
heart,its pumping strength,and the location and extent of
waves differently, these sound waves can be translated
any damage to its tissues. It is especially useful for assess-
into a meaningful image of the heart,which can be dis-
ing diseases of the heart valves. It not only allows doctors
played on a monitor or recorded on paper or tape. The
to evaluate the heart valves,but it can detect abnormalities
patient does not feel the sound waves,and the entire pro-
in the pattern of blood flow,such as the backward flow of
cedure is painless. In fact,there are no known side effects.
blood through partly closed heart valves,known as regur-
gitation. By assessing the motion of the heart wall, Occasionally, variations of the echocardiography
echocardiography can help detect the presence and assess test are used. For example, Doppler echocardiography
the severity of coronary artery disease,as well as help employs a special microphone that allows technicians to
determine whether any chest painis related to heart dis- measure and analyze the direction and speed of blood
ease. Echocardiography can also help detect hypertrophic flow through blood vessels and heart valves. This makes
cardiomyopathy,in which the walls of the heart thicken it especially useful for detecting and evaluating regurgi-
in an attempt to compensate for heart muscle weakness. tation through the heart valves. By assessing the speed of
The biggest advantage to echocardiography is that it is blood flow at different locations around an obstruction,it
noninvasive (doesn’t involve breaking the skin or entering can also help to precisely locate the obstruction.
body cavities) and has no known risks or side effects.
An exerciseechocardiogram is an echocardiogram
performed during exercise,when the heart muscle must
Precautions
work harder to supply blood to the body. This allows
Echocardiography is an extremely safe procedure doctors to detect heart problems that might not be evi-
and no special precautions are required. dent when the body is at rest and needs less blood. For
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1129
Echocardiography
A patient getting an EKG.(Photo Researchers.Reproduced by
permission.)
Resources
KEY TERMS
BOOKS
Faculty Members of the Yale University School of Medicine.
Noninvasive—Pertaining to a diagnostic proce- The Patient’s Book of Medical Tests.Boston:Houghton
dure or treatment that does not require the skin to Mifflin Co.,1997.
be broken or a body cavity to be entered.
PERIODICALS
Regurgitation—Backward flow of blood through a Rose,Verna L. “American College of Cardiology and American
partly closed heart valve. Heart Association Address the Use of Echocardiography.
American Family Physician56 (1 Oct. 1997):1489-90.
Transducer—A device that converts electrical sig-
nals into ultrasound waves and ultrasound waves ORGANIZATIONS
back into electrical impulses. American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
Ultrasound—Sound waves at a frequency of over
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. PO Box 30105,
20,000 kHz, often used for diagnostic imaging.
Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
Robert Scott Dinsmoor
patients who are unable to exercise,certain drugs can be
Echovirus infections see Enterovirus
used to mimic the effects of exercise by dilating the
blood vessels and making the heart beat faster. infections
Eclampsia see Preeclampsia and eclampsia
Preparation
ECT see Electroconvulsive therapy
The patient removes any clothing and jewelry above
Ectopic orifice of the ureter see Congenital
the chest.
ureter anomalies
Aftercare
No special measures need to be taken following
echocardiography.
Ectopic pregnancy
Risks
Definition
There are no known risks associated with the use of
In an ectopic pregnancy,the fertilized egg implants in
echocardiography.
a location outside the uterus and tries to develop there. The
word ectopic means “in an abnormal place or position.”The
Normal results most common site is the fallopian tube,the tube that nor-
mally carries eggs from the ovary to the uterus. However,
A normal echocardiogram shows a normal heart
ectopic pregnancy can also occur in the ovary,the abdomen,
structure and the normal flow of blood through the heart
and the cervical canal (the opening from the uterus to the
chambers and heart valves. However,a normal echocar-
vaginal canal). The phrases tubal pregnancy,ovarian preg-
diogram does not rule out the possibility of heart disease.
nancy,cervical pregnancy,and abdominal pregnancy refer
to the specific area of an ectopic pregnancy.
Abnormal results
An echocardiogram may show a number of abnor- Description
malities in the structure and function of the heart,such as:
Once a month,an egg is produced in a woman’s ovary
•thickening of the wall of the heart muscle (especially and travels down the fallopian tube where it meets the
the left ventricle) male’s sperm and is fertilized. In a normal pregnancy the
fertilized egg,or zygote,continues on its passage down the
•abnormal motion of the heart muscle
fallopian tube and enters the uterus in three to five days.
•blood leaking backward through the heart valves
The zygote continues to grow,implanting itself securely in
(regurgitation)
the wall of the uterus. The zygote’s cells develop into the
•decreased blood flow through a heart valve (stenosis) embryo (the organism in its first two months of develop-
1130 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ycnangerp
cipotcE
ment) and placenta (a spongy structure that lines the uterus
and nourishes the developing organism).
In a tubal ectopic pregnancy,the fertilized egg can-
not make it all the way down the tube because of scarring
or obstruction. The fallopian tube is too narrow for the
growing zygote. Eventually the thin walls of the tube
stretch and may burst (rupture),resulting in severe bleed-
ing and possibly the deathof the mother. More than 95%
percent of all ectopic pregnancies occur in the fallopian
tube. Only 1.5% develop in the abdomen; less than 1%
develop in the ovary or the cervix.
Causes and symptoms
As many as 50% of women with ectopic pregnancies
have a history of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).
This is an infection of the fallopian tubes (salpingitis)
that can spread to the uterus or ovaries. It is most com-
monly caused by the organisms Gonorrheaand Chlamy-
diaand is usually transmitted by sexual intercourse.
Other conditions also increase the risk of ectopic
pregnancy. They include:
•Endometriosis. A condition in which the tissue that
normally lines the uterus is found outside the uterus,
and can block a fallopian tube.
•Exposure to diethylsilbestrol (DES) as a fetus. If a •Surgery on a fallopian tube. The risk of ectopic preg-
woman’s mother took DES (a synthetic version of the nancy can be as high as 60% after undergoing elective
hormone estrogen) during pregnancy,the woman may tubal sterilization,a procedure in which the fallopian
have abnormalities in her fallopian tubes that can make tubes are severed to prevent pregnancy. Women who
ectopic pregnancy more likely. have successful surgery to reverse the procedure are
also more likely to have an ectopic pregnancy.
•Taking hormones. Estrogen and progesterone are hor-
mones that regulate the menstrual cycle and may be in
medications prescribed by a doctor for birth control or Early symptoms
other reasons. Taking these hormones can affect the inte- In an ectopic pregnancy all the hormonal changes
rior lining of the fallopian tubes and slow the movement associated with a normal pregnancy may occur. The early
of the fertilized egg down the tube. Women who become symptoms include:fatigue; nausea; a missed period; breast
pregnant in spite of taking some progesterone-only con- tenderness; low back pain; mild cramping on one side of
traceptives have a greater chance of an ectopic pregnan- the pelvis; and abnormal vaginal bleeding,usually spotting.
cy. Ectopic pregnancy is also more likely when the
ovaries are artificially stimulated with hormones to pro- Later symptoms
duce eggs for in vitro fertilization(a procedure in which
As the embryo grows too large for the confined
eggs are taken from a woman’s body,fertilized,and then
space in the tube,the first sign that something is wrong
placed in the uterus in an attempt to conceive a child).
may be a stabbing painin the pelvis or abdomen. If the
•Use of an intrauterine device (IUD). These contracep- tube has ruptured,blood may irritate the diaphragm and
tive devices are designed to prevent fertilized eggs from cause shoulder pain. Other warning signs are lighthead-
becoming implanted in the uterus,but they have only a edness and fainting.
minimal effect on preventing ectopic pregnancies.
Therefore,if a woman becomes pregnant while using
Diagnosis
an IUD for contraception, the fertilized egg is more
likely to be implanted someplace other than the uterus. To confirm an early diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy,
For example, among women who become pregnant the doctor must determine first that the patient is preg-
while using a progesterone-bearing IUD, about 15% nant and that the location of the embryo is outside the
have ectopic pregnancies. uterus. If an ectopic pregnancy is suspected,the doctor
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1131
Ectopic
pregnancy
Embryo
Ovary Uterus
Fallopian tube
Vagina
In an ectopic pregnancy,the fertilized egg implants in a
location outside the uterus and attempts to develop at that
site.The most common site of an ectopic pregnancy is the
fallopian tube,but it can occur in the ovary,the abdomen,
and the cervical wall.More than 95% of all ectopic pregnan-
cies occur in the fallopian tube.(Illustration by Electronic Illus-
trators Group.)
called a transducer,which emits high frequency sound
KEY TERMS waves, is moved over the surface of the patient’s
abdomen or inserted into the vagina. The sound waves
Embryo—In humans, the developing organism bounce off of the internal organs and create an image on
from conception until approximately the end of a screen. The doctor should be able to see whether or not
the second month. there is a fetus developing in the uterus after at least five
weeks of gestation. Before that point,a normal pregnan-
Fallopian tube—The tube that carries the egg from
cy is too small to see.
the ovary to the uterus.
A culdocentesis may also help confirm a diagnosis.
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)—A hor-
In this procedure a needle is inserted into the space at the
mone excreted during the development of an
top of the vagina, behind the uterus and in front of the
embryo or fetus.
rectum. Blood in this area may indicate bleeding from a
Laparoscopy—Examination of the contents of the ruptured fallopian tube.
abdominal cavity with a fiberoptic tube inserted
A laparoscopy will enable the doctor to see the
through a small incision.
patient’s reproductive organs and examine an ectopic
Laparotomy—Surgical incision into the abdomen pregnancy. In this technique,a hollow tube with a light
to locate, repair, and/or remove injured or dis- on one end is inserted through a small incision in the
eased tissues. abdomen. Through this instrument the internal organs
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)—Acute or can be observed.
chronic inflammation in the pelvic cavity, particu-
larly inflammation of the fallopian tubes (salpingi- Treatment
tis) and its complications.
Ectopic pregnancy requires immediate treatment.
Rupture—A breaking apart of an organ or tissue. The earlier the condition is treated,the better the chance
to preserve the fallopian tube intact for future normal
Salpingitis—Inflammation of the fallopian tube.
pregnancies.
Tubal pregnancy—Pregnancy in one of the fallopi-
an tubes.
Medical
Zygote—The fertilized egg.
If the ectopic pregnancy is discovered in a very early
stage of development, the drug methotrexate may be
given. The best results are obtained when the pregnancy
is less than six weeks old and the tubal mass is no more
will perform a pelvic examination to locate the source of than 1.4 in (3.5 cm) in diameter. Methotrexate,which has
pain and to detect a mass in the abdomen. been used successfully since 1987,works by inhibiting
the growth of rapidly growing cells. (It is also used to
Several laboratory tests of the patient’s blood pro-
treat some cancers.) Most side effects are mild and tem-
vide information for diagnosis. Measurement of the
porary,but the patient must be monitored after treatment.
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) level in the
Usually the medication is injected into the muscle in a
patient’s blood serum is the most useful laboratory test in
single dose, but may also be given intravenously or
the early stages. In a normal pregnancy,the level of this
injected directly into the fallopian tube to dissolve the
hormone doubles about every two days during the first
embryonic tissue. Methotrexate has also been used to
10 weeks. In an ectopic pregnancy, the rate of the
treat ovarian,abdominal,and cervical pregnancies that
increase is much slower and the low hCG for the stage of
are discovered in the early stages.
the pregnancy is a strong indication that the pregnancy is
abnormal. (It could also represent a miscarriage in
Surgical
progress.) The level is usually tested several times over a
period of days to determine whether or not it is increas- When a laparoscopy is done to visualize the ectopic
ing at a normal rate. pregnancy,the scope can be fitted with surgical tools and
used to remove the ectopic mass immediately after it is
Progesterone levels in the blood are also measured.
identified. The affected fallopian tube can be repaired or
Lower than expected levels can indicate that the pregnan-
removed as necessary. This procedure can be done with-
cy is not normal.
out requiring the patient to stay in the hospital overnight.
An ultrasound examination may provide information When the pregnancy has ruptured, a surgical inci-
about whether or not the pregnancy is ectopic. A device sion into the abdomen, or laparotomy, is performed to
1132 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
droW
hctaC
stop the immediate loss of blood and to remove the Stabile,Isabel. Ectopic Pregnancy:Diagnosis and Manage-
embryo. This usually requires general anesthesia and a ment.Cambridge University Press,1996.
hospital stay. Every effort is made to preserve and repair
PERIODICALS
the injured fallopian tube. However,if the fallopian tube
Maiolatesi,C. R. “Methotrexate for Nonsurgical Treatment of
has already ruptured,repair is extremely difficult and the
Ectopic Pregnancy:Nursing Implications.”Journal of
tube is usually removed. Obstetrical Gynecological Neonatal Nursing(Mar./Apr.
1996):205-208.
Alternative treatment
ORGANIZATIONS
Ectopic pregnancy was first described in the eleventh Resolve. 1310 Broadway,Somerville,MA 02144-1731. (617)
century and was a potentially fatal condition until the 623-0744. <http://www.resolve.org>.
advent of surgery and blood transfusions in the early
twentieth century. The sophisticated diagnostic tools and Karen Ericson,RN
surgical procedures developed since the 1970s have
Eczema see Dermatitis
equipped modern medicine with the tools to not only save
a woman’s life,but also to preserve her future fertility. ED see Impotence
Although there are herbal remedies for the tempo-
rary relief of the common symptoms of anxiety and
abdominal discomfort,prompt medical treatment is the
only sure remedy for ectopic pregnancy.
Edema
Prognosis
Definition
Ectopic pregnancies are the leading cause of preg-
nancy-related deaths in the first trimester and account for Edema is a condition of abnormally large fluid vol-
9% of all pregnancy-related deaths in the United States. ume in the circulatory system or in tissues between the
More than 1% of pregnancies are ectopic,and they are body’s cells (interstitial spaces).
becoming more common. The reason for this increase is
not clearly understood,though it is thought that the dra-
Description
matic increase in sexually transmitted diseases(STD)
is at least partly responsible. Normally the body maintains a balance of fluid in
The earlier an ectopic pregnancy is diagnosed and tissues by ensuring that the same of amount of water
treated,the better the outcome. The chances of having a entering the body also leaves it. The circulatory system
successful pregnancy are lower after an ectopic pregnan- transports fluid within the body via its network of blood
cy,but depend on the extent of permanent fallopian tube vessels. The fluid,which contains oxygen and nutrients
damage. If the tube has been spared,chances are as high needed by the cells,moves from the walls of the blood
as 60%. The chances of a successful pregnancy after the vessels into the body’s tissues. After its nutrients are used
removal of one tube are 40%. up,fluid moves back into the blood vessels and returns to
the heart. The lymphatic system (a network of channels
in the body that carry lymph,a colorless fluid containing
Prevention
white blood cells to fight infection) also absorbs and
Many forms of ectopic pregnancy cannot be prevent- transports this fluid. In edema, either too much fluid
ed. However,tubal pregnancies,which make up the major- moves from the blood vessels into the tissues, or not
ity of ectopic pregnancies,may be prevented by avoiding enough fluid moves from the tissues back into the blood
conditions that cause damage to the fallopian tubes. Since vessels. This fluid imbalance can cause mild to severe
half of all women who experience ectopic pregnancy have swelling in one or more parts of the body.
a history of PID,avoiding this infection or getting early
diagnosis and treatment for sexually transmitted diseases
Causes and symptoms
will decrease the risk of a future problem.
Many ordinary factors can upset the balance of fluid
Resources in the body to cause edema,including:
BOOKS •Immobility. The leg muscles normally contract and
Cunningham,F. Gary,et al. “Ectopic Pregnancy.”In Williams compress blood vessels to promote blood flow with
Obstetrics.Appleton & Lange,1997. walking or running. When these muscles are not used,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1133
Edema
blood can collect in the veins, making it difficult for cause shifts into the interstitial spaces. Left-sided heart
fluid to move from tissues back into the vessels. failure can cause pulmonary edema,as fluid shifts into
the lungs. The patient may develop rapid,shallow res-
•Heat. Warm temperatures cause the blood vessels to
pirations, shortness of breath, and a cough. Right-
expand, making it easier for fluid to cross into sur-
sided heart failure can cause pitting edema,a swelling
rounding tissues. High humidity also aggravates this
in the tissue under the skin of the lower legs and feet.
situation.
Pressing this tissue with a finger tip leads to a notice-
•Medications. Certain drugs,such as steroids,hormone able momentary indentation.
replacements,nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs),and some blood pressure medications may •Kidney disease. The decrease in sodium and water
affect how fast fluid leaves blood vessels. excretion can result in fluid retention and overload.
•Intake of salty foods. The body needs a constant con- •Thyroid or liver disease. These conditions can change
centration of salt in its tissues. When excess salt is the concentration of protein in the blood,affecting fluid
taken in,the body dilutes it by retaining fluid. movement in and out of the tissues. In advanced liver
disease,the liver is enlarged and fluid may build-up in
•Menstruation and pregnancy. The changing levels of
the abdomen.
hormones affect the rate at which fluid enters and
leaves the tissues. •Malnutrition. Protein levels are decreased in the blood,
Some medical conditions may also cause edema, and in an effort to maintain a balance of concentrations,
including: fluid shifts out of the vessels and causes edema in tissue
spaces.
•Heart failure. When the heart is unable to maintain
adequate blood flow throughout the circulatory system, Some conditions that may cause swelling in just one
the excess fluid pressure within the blood vessels can leg include:
1134 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
amedE
Gross lymphedema in the arm of an elderly woman following radiotherapy treatment for breast cancer.(Photograph by Dr.P.
Marazzi.Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
•Blood clots. Clots can cause pooling of fluid and may
be accompanied by discoloration and pain. In some KEY TERMS
instances,clots may cause no pain.
•Weakened veins. Varicose veins,or veins whose walls Digitalis—A naturally occuring compound used in
or valves are weak,can allow blood to pool in the legs. the preparation of the medication, digoxin, pre-
This is a common condition. scribed to increase the heart rate and strengthen
the force of the heart’s contractions.
•Infection and inflammation. Infection in leg tissues can
cause inflammation and increasing blood flow to the Diuretics—Medications used in the treatment of
area. Inflammatory diseases,such as goutor arthritis, fluid overload, to promote excretion of sodium
can also result in swelling. and water.
•Lymphedema. Blocked lymph channels may be caused Interstitial spaces—Areas of the body occuring
by infection, scar tissue, or hereditary conditions. outside the vessels or organs, between the cells.
Lymph that can’t drain properly results in edema. Lym- Pitting edema—A swelling in the tissue under the
phedema may also occur after cancertreatments,when skin, resulting from fluid accumulation, that is
the lymph system is impaired by surgery,radiation,or measured by the depth of indentation made by fin-
chemotherapy. ger pressure over a boney prominence.
•Tumor. Abnormal masses can compress leg vessels and
lymph channels,affecting the rate of fluid movement.
Symptoms vary depending on the cause of edema. In
general,weight gain,puffy eyelids,and swelling of the •Massage. Massaging the body part can help to stimu-
legs may occur as a result of excess fluid volume. Pulse late the release of excess fluids,but should be avoided
rate and blood pressure may be elevated. Hand and neck if the patient has blood clots in the veins.
veins may be observed as fuller.
•Travel breaks. Sitting for long periods will increase
swelling in the feet and ankles. Standing and/or walk-
Diagnosis ing at least every hour or two will help stimulate blood
flow.
Edema is a sign of an underlying problem, rather
than a disease unto itself. A diagnostic explanation The three “Ds”—diuretics,digitalis,and diet—are
should be sought. Patient history and presenting symp- frequently prescribed for medical conditions that result
toms,along with laboratory blood studies,if indicated, in excess fluid volume. Diuretics are medications that
assist the health professional in determining the cause of promote urination of sodium and water. Digoxin is a dig-
the edema. italis preparation that is sometimes needed to decrease
heart rate and increase the strength of the heart’s contrac-
tions. Dietary recommendations include less sodium in
Treatment
order to decrease fluid retention. Consideration of ade-
Treatment of edema is based on the cause. Simple quate protein intake is also made.
steps to lessen fluid build-up may include:
For patients with lymphedema, a combination of
•Reducing sodium intake. A high sodium level causes or
therapies may prove effective. Combined decongestive
aggravates fluid retention.
therapy includes the use of manual lymph drainage
•Maintaining proper weight. Being overweight slows (MLD),compression bandaging,garments and pumps,
body fluid circulation and puts extra pressure on the and physical therapy. MLD involves the use of light
veins. massage of the subcutaneous tissue where the lymph
vessels predominate. Massage begins in an area of the
•Exercise. Regular exercise stimulates circulation.
body trunk where there is normal lymph function and
•Elevation of the legs. Placing the legs at least 12 in
proceeds to areas of lymphatic insufficiency, in an
(30.5 cm) above the level of the heart for 10–15 min-
effort to stimulate new drainage tract development.
utes,three to four times a day,stimulates excess fluid
(MLD should not be used for patients with active can-
re-entry into the circulatory system.
cer, deep vein clots, congestive heart failure, or cel-
•Use of support stocking. Elastic stockings,available at lulitis.) MLD sessions are followed by application of
most medical supply or drug stores,will compress the compression garments or pumps. Physical therapy is
leg vessels,promoting circulation and decreasing pool- aimed at strengthening the affected limb and increas-
ing of fluid due to gravity. ing joint mobility.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1135
Edema
Alternative treatment 18 occurs in approximately one in every 3,000 newborns
and affects girls more often than boys. Women older than
Dietary changes, in addition to cutting back the
their early thirties have a greater risk of conceiving a child
amount of sodium eaten, may also help reduce edema.
with trisomy 18,but it can occur in younger women.
Foods that worsen edema, such as alcohol, caffeine,
sugar,dairy products,soy sauce,animal protein,choco-
late,olives,and pickles,should be avoided. Diuretic herbs Causes and symptoms
can also help relieve edema. One of the best herbs for this
A third copy of chromosome 18 causes numerous
purpose is dandelion (Taraxacum mongolicum),since,in
abnormalities. Most children born with Edwards’syn-
addition to its diuretic action,it is a rich source of potassi-
drome appear weak and fragile,and they are often under-
um. (Diuretics flush potassium from the body and it must
weight. The head is unusually small and the back of the
be replaced to avoid potassium deficiency.) Hydrothera-
head is prominent. The ears are malformed and low-set,
py using daily contrast applications of hot and cold
and the mouth and jaw are small. The baby may also
(either compresses or immersion) may also be helpful.
have a cleft lip or cleft palate. Frequently,the hands are
clenched into fists, and the index finger overlaps the
Resources
other fingers. The child may have clubfeet and toes may
BOOKS be webbed or fused.
Monahan,Frances D.,and Marianne Neighbors. Medical-Sur-
Numerous problems involving the internal organs
gical Nursing:Foundation for Clinical Practice.2nd ed.
may be present. Abnormalities often occur in the lungs
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1998.
and diaphragm (the muscle that controls breathing),and
ORGANIZATIONS heart defects and blood vessel malformations are com-
Lymphedema and Wound Care Clinic of Austin. 5750 Balcones mon. The child may also have malformed kidneys and
Dr.,Ste. 110,Austin,TX 78731. (512) 453-1930. abnormalities of the urogenital system.
Kathleen D. Wright,RN
Diagnosis
Edrophonium test see Tensilon test
Physical abnormalities point to Edwards’syndrome,
but definitive diagnosis relies on karyotyping. Karyotyp-
ing involves drawing the baby’s blood or bone marrow
for a microscopic examination of the chromosomes.
Using special stains and microscopy,individual chromo-
Edwards’ syndrome somes are identified,and the presence of an extra chro-
mosome 18 is revealed.
Definition
Trisomy 18 can be detected before birth. If a preg-
Edwards’ syndrome is caused by an extra copy of nant woman is older than 35, has a family history of
chromosome 18. For this reason,it is also called trisomy 18 genetic abnormalities,has previously conceived a child
syndrome. The extra chromosome is lethal for most babies with a genetic abnormality,or has suffered earlier miscar-
born with this condition. It causes major physical abnor- riages,she may undergo tests to determine whether her
malities and severe mental retardation,and very few chil- child carries genetic abnormalities. Potential tests include
dren afflicted with this disease survive beyond a year. maternal serum analysis or screening,ultrasonography,
amniocentesis,and chorionic villus sampling.
Description
Humans normally have 23 pairs of chromosomes. Treatment
Chromosomes are numbered 1–22,and the 23rd pair is
There is no cure for Edwards’syndrome. Since tri-
composed of the sex chromosomes,X and Y. A person
somy 18 babies frequently have major physical abnor-
inherits one set of 23 chromosomes from each parent.
malities, doctors and parents face difficult choices
Occasionally, a genetic error occurs during egg or
regarding treatment. Abnormalities can be treated to a
sperm cell formation. A child conceived with such an
certain degree with surgery,but extreme invasive proce-
egg or sperm cell may inherit an incorrect number of
dures may not be in the best interests of an infant whose
chromosomes.
lifespan is measured in days or weeks. Medical therapy
In the case of Edwards’syndrome,the child inherits often consists of supportive care with the goal of making
three,rather than two,copies of chromosome 18. Trisomy the infant comfortable,rather than prolonging life.
1136 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
’sdrawdE
KEY TERMS
Aminocentesis—A procedure in which a needle is order from largest to smallest so that their number
inserted through a pregnant woman’s abdomen and and structure can be studied under a microscope.
into her uterus to withdraw a small sample of amni-
Maternal serum analyte screening—A medical pro-
otic fluid. The amniotic fluid can be examined for
cedure in which a pregnant woman’s blood is
signs of disease or other problems afflicting the fetus.
drawn and analyzed for the levels of certain hor-
Chorionic villus sampling—A medical test that is
mones and proteins. These levels can indicate
best done during weeks 10–12 of a pregnancy. The
whether there may be an abnormality in the unborn
procedure involves inserting a needle into the pla-
child. This test is not a definitive indicator of a prob-
centa and withdrawing a small amount of the chori-
lem and is followed by more specific testing such as
onic membrane for analysis.
amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling.
Chromosome—A structure composed of deoxyri-
Trisomy—A condition in which a third copy of a
bonucleic acid (DNA) contained within a cell’s
chromosome is inherited. Normally only two copies
nucleus (center) in where genetic information is
should be inherited.
stored. Human have 23 pairs of chromosomes, each
of which has recognizable characteristics (such as
Ultrasound—A medical test that is also called ultra-
length and staining patterns) that allow individual
sonography. Sound waves are directed against inter-
chromosomes to be identified. Identification is
nal structures in the body. As sound waves bounce
assigned by number (1–22) or letter (X or Y).
off the internal structure, they create an image on a
Karyotyping—A laboratory test used to study an video screen. An ultrasound of a fetus at weeks
individual’s chromosome make-up. Chromosomes 16–20 of a pregnancy can be used to determine
are separated from cells, stained, and arranged in structural abnormalities.
Prognosis Support Organization for Trisomy 18,13,and Related Disor-
ders (SOFT). 2982 South Union St.,Rochester,NY
Most children born with trisomy 18 die within their 14624. (800) 716-7638. <http://www.trisomy.org>.
first year of life. The average lifespan is less than two
months for 50% of the children,and 90–95% die before Julia Barrett
their first birthday. The 5–10% of children who survive
their first year are severely mentally retarded. They need EEG see Electroencephalography
support to walk,and learning is limited. Verbal commu-
Egyptian conjunctivitis see Trachoma
nication is also limited,but they can learn to recognize
and interact with others.
Prevention
Edwards’syndrome cannot be prevented. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Definition
Resources
BOOKS The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) refer to a
Gardner,R. J. McKinlay,and Grant R. Sutherland. Chromo- group of inherited disorders that affect collagen structure
some Abnormalities and Genetic Counseling.New York: and function. Genetic abnormalities in the manufacturing
Oxford University Press,1996. of collagen within the body affect connective tissues,
Jones,Kenneth Lyons. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of causing them to be abnormally weak.
Human Malformation.5th ed. W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
ORGANIZATIONS Description
The Chromosome 18 Registry & Research Society. 6302 Fox
Head,San Antonio,TX 78247. (210) 657-4968. <http:// Collagen is a strong, fibrous protein that lends
www.chromosome18.org>. strength and elasticity to connective tissues such as the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1137
Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome
skin,tendons,organ walls,cartilage,and blood vessels. Hypermobility type
Each of these connective tissues requires collagen tai-
Excessively loose joints are the hallmark of this EDS
lored to meet its specific purposes. The many roles of
type,formerly known as EDS type III. Both large joints,
collagen are reflected in the number of genes dedicated
such as the elbows and knees,and small joints,such as
to its production. There are at least 28 genes in humans
toes and fingers,are affected. Partial and total joint dislo-
that encode at least 19 different types of collagen. Muta-
cations are common, and particularly involve the jaw,
tions in these genes can affect basic construction as well
knee,and shoulder. Many individuals experience chronic
as the fine-tuned processing of the collagen.
limb and joint pain,although x rays of these joints appear
EDS was originally described by Dr. Van Meekeren normal. The skin may also bruise easily. Osteoarthritisis
in 1682. Dr. Ehlers and Dr. Danlos further characterized a common occurrence in adults. EDS hypermobility type
the disease in 1901 and 1908, respectively. Today, is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
according to the Ehlers-Danlos National Foundation,one
There are two major clinical diagnostic criteria for
in 5,000 to one in 10,000 people are affected by some
EDS hypermobility type. These include skin involvement
form of EDS.
(either hyperextensible skin or smooth and velvety skin)
EDS is a group of genetic disorders that usually and generalized joint hypermobility. At this time there is
affects the skin,ligaments,joints,and blood vessels. Clas- no test for this form of EDS.
sification of EDS types was revised in 1997. The new
classification involves categorizing the different forms of
Vascular type
EDS into six major sub-types,including classical,hyper-
mobility, vascular, kyphoscoliosis, arthrochalasia, and Formerly called EDS type IV,EDS vascular type is
dermatosparaxis, and a collection of rare or poorly the most severe form. The connective tissue in the
defined varieties. This new classification is simpler and intestines,arteries,uterus,and other hollow organs may
based more on descriptions of the actual symptoms. be unusually weak,leading to organ or blood vessel rup-
ture. Such ruptures are most likely between ages 20 and
40,although they can occur any time,and may be life-
Classical type
threatening.
Under the old classification system, EDS classical
There is a classic facial appearance associated with
type was divided into two separate types:type I and type
EDS vascular type. Affected individuals tend to have
II. The major symptoms involved in EDS classical type
large eyes,a thin pinched nose,thin lips,and a slim body.
are the skin and joints. The skin has a smooth, velvety
The skin is thin and translucent,with veins dramatically
texture and bruiseseasily. Affected individuals typically
visible,particularly across the chest.
have extensive scaring,particularly at the knees,elbows,
forehead,and chin. The joints are hyperextensible,giving The large joints have normal stability, but small
a tendency towards dislocation of the hip, shoulder, joints in the hands and feet are loose,showing hyperex-
elbow,knee,or clavicle. Due to decreased muscle tone, tensibility. The skin bruises easily. Other complications
affected infants may experience a delay in reaching motor may include collapsed lungs,premature agingof the skin
milestones. Children may have a tendency to develop her- on the hands and feet, and ruptured arteries and veins.
nias or other organ shifts within the abdomen. Sprains and After surgery there tends to be poor wound healing, a
partial or complete joint dilocations are also common. complication that tends to be frequent and severe. Preg-
Symptoms can range from mild to severe. EDS classical nancy also carries the risk complications. During and
type is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. after pregnancy there is an increased risk of the uterus
rupturing and of arterial bleeding. Due to the severe com-
There are three major clinical diagnostic criteria for
plications associated with EDS type IV, death usually
EDS classical type. These include skin hyperextensibili-
occurs before the fifth decade. A study of 419 individuals
ty,unusually wide scars,and joint hypermobility. At this
with EDS vascular type,completed in 2000,found that
time there is no definitive test for the diagnosis of classi-
the median survival rate was 48 years,with a range of six
cal EDS. Both DNA and biochemical studies have been
to 73 years. EDS vascular type is inherited in an autoso-
used to help identify affected individuals. In some cases,
mal dominant manner.
a skin biopsyhas been found to be useful in confirming
a diagnosis. Unfortunately,these tests are not sensitive There are four major clinical diagnostic criteria for
enough to identify all individuals with classical EDS. If EDS vascular type. These include thin translucent skin,
there are multiple affected individuals in a family,it may arterial/intestinal/uterine fragility or rupture, extensive
be possible to perform prenatal diagnosis using a DNA bruising,and characteristic facial appearance. EDS vascu-
information technique known as a linkage study. lar type is caused by a change in the gene COL3A1,
1138 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
solnaD-srelhE
which codes for one of the collagen chains used to build
Collage type III. Laboratory testing is available for this
form of EDS. A skin biopsy may be used to demonstrate
the structurally abnormal collagen. This type of biochem-
ical test identifies more than 95% of individuals with EDS
vascular type. Laboratory testing is recommended for
individuals with two or more of the major criteria.
DNA analysis may als be used to identify the change
within the COL3A1 gene. This information may be help-
ful for genetic counselingpurposes. Prenatal testing is
available for pregnancies in which an affected parent has
been identified and their DNA mutation is known or their
biochemical defect has been demonstrated.
Kyphoscoliosis type
The major symptoms of kyphoscoliosis type, for-
merly called EDS type VI,are general joint looseness. At
birth,the muscle tone is poor,and motor skill develop- type of EDS may also experience mildly diminished
ment is subsequently delayed. Also,infants with this type bone mass,scoliosis,and poor muscle tone. Arthrochala-
of EDS have an abnormal curvature of the spine (scolio- sia type is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
sis). The scoliosis becomes progressively worse with There are two major clinical diagnostic criteria for
age,with affected individuals usually unable to walk by EDS arthrochalasia type. These include sever general-
age 20. The eyes and skin are fragile and easily damaged, ized joing hypermobility and bilateral hip dislocation
and blood vessel involvement is a possibility. The bones present at birth. This form of EDS is caused by a change
may also be affected as demonstrated by a decrease in in either of two components of Collage type I, called
bone mass. Kyphoscoliosis type is inherited in an autoso- proa1(I) type A and proa2(I) type B. A skin biopsy may
mal recessive manner. be preformed to demonstrate an abnormality in either
There are four major clinical diagnostic criteria for components. Direct DNA testing is also available.
EDS kyphoscoliosis type. These include generaly loose
Dermatosparaxis type
joints,low muscle tone at birth,scoliosis at birth (which
worsens with age),and a fragility of the eyes,which may Individuals with this type of EDS,once called type
give the white area of the eye a blue tint or cause the eye VIIC,have extremely fragile skin that bruises easily but
to rupture. This form of EDS is caused by a change in the does not scar excessively. The skin is soft and may sag,
PLOD gene on chromosome 1, which encodes the leading to an aged appearance even in young adults. Indi-
enzyme lysyl hydroxylase. A laboratory test is available viduals may also experience hernias. Dermatosparaxis
in which urinary hydroxylysyl pryridinoline is measured. type is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
This test,performed on urine is extremely senstive and
There are two major clinical diagnostic criteria for
specific for EDS kyphoscolios type. Laboratory testing is
EDS dematosparaxis type. These include severe skin
recommended for infants with three or more of the major
fragility and sagging or aged appearing skin. This form of
diagnostic criteria.
EDS is caused by a change in the enzyme called procolla-
Prenatal testing is available if a pregnancy is known gen I N-terminal peptidase. A skin biopsy may be pre-
to be at risk and an identified affected family member has formed for a definitive diagnosis of Dermatosparaxis type.
had positive laboratory testing. An amniocentesismay
be performed in which fetal cells are removed from the Other types
amniotic fluid and enzyme activity is measured.
There are several other forms of EDS that have not
been as clearly defined as the aforementioned types.
Arthrochalasia type
Forms of EDS within this category may present with
Dislocation of the hip joint typically accompanies soft, mildly stretchable skin, shortened bones, chronic
arthrochalasia type EDS,formerly called EDS type VIIB. diarrhea,joint hypermobility and dislocation,bladder
Other joints are also unusually loose,leading to recurrent rupture, or poor wound healing. Inheritance patterns
partial and total dislocations. The skin has a high degree within this group include X-linked recessive,autosomal
of stretchability and bruises easily. Individuals with this dominant,and autosomal recessive.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1139
Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome
Elasticity of the skin is one characteristic of this rare disor-
der.(Photograph by Biophoto Associates, Photo Researchers,
Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Arthrochalasia—Excessive loosness of the joints. Hypermobility—Unusual flexibility of the joints,
allowing them to be bent or moved beyond their
Blood vessels—General term for arteries, veins, and
normal range of motion.
capillaries that transport blood throughout the body.
Cartilage—Supportive connective tissue that cush- Joint dislocation—The displacement of a bone.
ions bone at the joints or which connects muscle to
Kyphoscoliosis—Abnormal front-to-back and side-
bone.
to-side curvature of the spine.
Collagen—The main supportive protein of cartilage,
Ligament—A type of connective tissue that con-
connective tissue, tendon, skin, and bone.
nects bones or cartilage and provides support and
Connective tissue—A group of tissues responsible strength to joints.
for support throughout the body; includes cartilage,
Osteoarthritis—A degenerative joint disease that
bone, fat, tissue underlying skin, and tissues that
causes pain and stiffness.
support organs, blood vessels, and nerves through-
out the body. Scoliosis—An abnormal, side-to-side curvature of
the spine.
Dermatosparaxis—Skin fragility caused by abnor-
mal collagen. Tendon—A strong connective tissue that connects
muscle to bone.
Hernia—A rupture in the wall of a body cavity,
through which an organ may protrude. Uterus—A muscular, hollow organ of the female
Homeopathic—A holistic and natural approach to reproductive tract. The uterus contains and nourish-
healthcare. es the embryo and fetus from the time the fertilized
egg is implanted until birth.
Hyperextensibility—The ability to extend a joint
beyond the normal range. Vascular—Having to do with blood vessels.
Causes and symptoms ty of passing on the disorder to a future child. In X-
linked EDS a specific gene on the X chromosome must
There are numerous types of EDS, all caused by
be changed. However,this affects males and females dif-
changes in one of several genes. The manner in which EDS
ferently because males and females have a different num-
is inherited depends on the specific gene involved. There
ber of X chromosomes.
are three patterns of inheritance for EDS:autosomal domi-
As of 2001 the few X-linked forms of EDS fall under
nant,autosomal recessive,and X-linked (extremely rare).
the category of X-linked recessive. As with autosomal
Chromosomes are made up of hundreds of small
recessive,this implies that both copies of a specific gene
units known as genes,which contain the genetic material
must be changed for a person to be affected. However,
necessary for an individual to develop and function.
because males only have one X-chromosome, they are
Humans have 46 chromosomes,which are matched into
affected if an X-linked recessive EDS gene is changed on
23 pairs. Because chromosomes are inherited in pairs,
their single X-chromosome. That is, they are affected
each individual receives two copies of each chromosome
even though they have only one changed copy. On the
and likewise two copies of each gene.
other hand,that same gene must be changed on both of
Changes or mutations in genes can cause genetic the X-chromosomes in a female for her to be affected.
diseases in several different ways, many of which are
Although there is much information regarding the
represented within the spectrum of EDS. In autosomal
changes in genes that cause EDS and their various inheri-
dominant EDS,only one copy of a specific gene must be
tance patterns,the exact gene mutation for all types of
changed for a person to have EDS. In autosomal reces-
EDS is not known.
sive EDS,both copies of a specific gene must be changed
for a person to have EDS. If only one copy of an autoso-
Diagnosis
mal recessive EDS gene is changed the person is referred
to as a carrier,meaning they do not have any of the signs Clinical symptoms such as extreme joint looseness
or symptoms of the disease itself,but carry the possibili- and unusual skin qualities,along with family history,can
1140 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
solnaD-srelhE
lead to a diagnosis of EDS. Specific tests, such as skin opathic treatment may be helpful in maintaining optimal
biopsies are available for diagnosis of certain types of health in persons with a diagnosis of EDS. An individual
EDS, including vascular, arthrochalasia, and der- with EDS should discuss these types of therapies with
matosparaxis types. A skin biopsy involves removing a their doctor before beginning them on their own. Thera-
small sample of skin and examining its microscopic struc- py that does not require medical consultation involves
ture. A urine test is available for the Kyphoscoliosis type. protecting the skin with sunscreen and avoiding activities
that place stresson the joints.
Management of all types of EDS may include genet-
ic counseling to help the affected individual and their
family understand the disorder and its impact on other Prognosis
family members and future children.
The outlook for individuals with EDS depends on
If a couple has had a child diagnosed with EDS the
the type of EDS with which they have been diagnosed.
chance that they will have another child with the same
Symptoms vary in severity, even within one sub-type,
disorder depends on with what form of EDS the child has
and the frequency of complications changes on an indi-
been diagnosed and if either parent is affected by the
vidual basis. Some individuals have negligible symptoms
same disease or not.
while others are severely restricted in their daily life.
Individuals diagnosed with an autosomal dominant Extreme joint instability and scoliosis may limit a per-
form of EDS have a 50% chance of passing the same disor- son’s mobility. Most individuals will have a normal lifes-
der on to a child in each pregnancy. Individuals diagnosed pan. However,those with blood vessel involvement,par-
with an autosomal recessive form of EDS have an extreme- ticularly those with EDS vascular type,have an increased
ly low risk of having a child with the same disorder. risk of fatal complications.
X-linked recessive EDS is accompanied by a slight- EDS is a lifelong condition. Affected individuals
ly more complicated pattern of inheritance. If a father may face social obstacles related to their disease on a
with an X-linked recessive form of EDS passes a copy of daily basis. Some people with EDS have reported living
his X chromosome to his children,the sons will be unaf- with fears of significant and painful skin ruptures,
fected and the daughters will be carriers. If a mother is a becoming pregnant (especially those with EDS vascular
carrier for an X-linked recessive form of EDS,she may type),their condition worsening,becoming unemployed
have affected or unaffected sons,or carrier or unaffected due to physical and emotional burdens, and social
daughters, depending on the second sex chromosome stigmatization in general.
inherited from the father.
Constant bruises,skin wounds,and trips to the hos-
Prenatal diagnosis is available for specific forms of pital take their toll on both affected children and their
EDS,including kyphosocliosis type and vascular type. parents. Prior to diagnosis parents of children with EDS
However, prenatal testing is only a possibility in these have found themselves under suspicion of child abuse.
types if the underlying defect has been found in another
Some people with EDS are not diagnosed until well
family member.
into adulthood and, in the case of EDS vascular type,
occasionally not until after death due to complications of
the disorder. Not only may the diagnosis itself be devas-
Treatment
tating to the family,but in many cases other family mem-
Medical therapy relies on managing symptoms and bers find out for the first time they are at risk for being
trying to prevent further complications. There is no cure affected.
for EDS.
Although individuals with EDS face significant
Braces may be prescribed to stabilize joints,although challenges,it is important to remember that each person
surgery is sometimes necessary to repair joint damage is unique with their own distinguished qualities and
caused by repeated dislocations. Physical therapy teaches potential. Persons with EDS go on to have families, to
individuals how to strengthen muscles around joints and have careers,and to be accomplished citizens,surmount-
may help to prevent or limit damage. Elective surgery is ing the challenges of their disease.
discouraged due to the high possibility of complications.
Resources
Alternative treatment
PERIODICALS
There are anecdotal reports that large daily doses
“Clinical and Genetic Features of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
0.04–0.14 oz (1–4 g) of vitamin C may help decrease Type IV,the Vascular Type.”The New England Journal of
bruising and aid in wound healing. Constitutional home- Medicine342,no. 10 (2000).
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1141
Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome
“Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes:Revised Nosology,Villefranche, setts,Rhode Island,Minnesota,New York,and Wiscon-
1997.”American Journal of Medical Genetics77 (1998): sin.
31–37.
“Living a Restricted Life with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.”
International Journal of Nursing Studies37 (2000): Causes and symptoms
111–118.
Both forms of ehrlichiosis have similar symptoms,
and the illnesses can range from mild to severe and life-
ORGANIZATIONS
Elhers-Danlos National Foundation. 6399 Wilshire Blvd.,Ste threatening. Risk factors include old age and exposure to
203,Los Angeles,CA 90048 (323) 651-3038. Fax:(323) ticks through work or recreation. Symptoms occur seven
651-1366. <http://www.ednf.org>. to 21 days following a tick bite although patients may not
Ehlers-Danlos Support Group- UK. PO Box 335,Farnham, recall being bitten. Fever, tiredness, headache, muscle
Surrey,GU10 1XJ. UK. <http://www. atv.ndirect.co.uk>. aches, chills, loss of appetite, confusion, nausea, and
vomiting are common to both diseases. A rash may
OTHER
occur.
GeneClinics. <http://www.geneclinics.org>.
Java O. Solis,MS Diagnosis
Ehrlichiosis may be diagnosed and treated by doc-
tors who specialize in blood diseases (hematologists) or
an infectious disease specialist. Because ehrlichiosis is
not very common and the symptoms are not unique, it
Ehrlichiosis may be misdiagnosed. A recent history of a tick bite is
helpful in the diagnosis. Blood tests will be done to look
Definition for antibodies to Ehrlichia. Staining and microscopic
examination of the blood sample may show Ehrlichia
Ehrlichiosis is a bacterial infection that is spread by
bacteria inside white blood cells. Another test, called
ticks. Symptoms include fever,chills,headache,muscle
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), is a very sensitive
aches,and tiredness.
assay to detect bacteria in the blood sample,but it is not
always available.
Description
Ehrlichiosis is a tick-borne disease caused by infec- Treatment
tion with Ehrlichiabacteria. Ticks are small,blood-suck-
Antibiotic treatment should begin immediately if
ing arachnids. Although some ticks carry disease-causing
ehrlichiosis is suspected, even if laboratory results are
organisms,most do not. When an animal or person is bit-
not available. Treatment with either tetracycline
ten by a tick that carries bacteria,the bacteria are passed
(Sumycin, Achromycin V) or doxycycline (Monodox,
to that person or animal during the tick’s feeding process.
Vibramycin) is recommended. Many patients with ehrli-
It is believed that the tick must remain attached to the
chiosis are admitted to the hospital for treatment.
person or animal for at least 24 hours to spread the infec-
tion.
Prognosis
There are two forms of ehrlichiosis in the United
States; human monocytic ehrlichiosis and human gran- For otherwise healthy people, a full recovery is
ulocytic ehrlichiosis. Monocytic ehrlichiosis is caused expected following treatment for ehrlichiosis. Elderly
by Ehrlichia chaffeensis,which is spread by the Lone patients are at a higher risk for severe disease,which may
Star tick,Amblyomma americanum. As of early 1998, be fatal. Serious complications include lung or gastroin-
about 400 cases of monocytic ehrlichiosis had been testinal bleeding. Two to 10 patients out of 100 die from
reported in 30 states,primarily in the southeastern and the disease.
south central United States. The bacteria that causes
granulocytic ehrlichiosis is not known,but suspected to
Prevention
be either Ehrlichia equi or Ehrlichia phagocytophila.
Granulocytic ehrlichiosis is probably spread by the The only prevention for ehrlichiosis is to minimize
blacklegged tick Ixodes scapularis(which also spreads exposure to ticks by staying on the trail when walking
Lyme disease). About 100 cases of granulocytic ehrli- through the woods,avoiding tall grasses,wearing long
chiosis have been reported in Connecticut,Massachu- sleeves and tucking pant legs into socks,wearing insect
1142 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisoihcilrhE
ty of injury is determined primarily by the voltage,low
KEY TERMS voltage can be just as dangerous as high voltage under
the right circumstances. People have been killed by
Tick-borne disease—A disease that is spread to shocks of just 50 volts.
animals by the bite of an infected tick. How electric shocks affect the skin is determined by
the skin’s resistance,which in turn is dependent upon the
wetness,thickness,and cleanliness of the skin. Thin or wet
skin is much less resistant than thick or dry skin. When
repellent,and checking for ticks after an outing. Remove skin resistance is low,the current may cause little or no
a tick as soon as possible by grasping the tick with skin damage but severely burn internal organs and tissues.
tweezers and gently pulling. Conversely,high skin resistance can produce severe skin
burnsbut prevent the current from entering the body.
Resources The nervous system (the brain, spinal cord, and
nerves) is particularly vulnerable to injury. In fact,neuro-
BOOKS
McDade,Joseph E.,and James G. Olsen. “Ehrlichiosis,Q logical problems are the most common kind of nonlethal
Fever,Typhus,Rickettsialpox,and Other Rickettsioses.” harm suffered by electric shock victims. Some neurological
In Infectious Diseases.2nd ed. Philadelphia:W. B. Saun- damage is minor and clears up on its own or with medical
ders Co.,1998. treatment,but some is severe and permanent. Neurological
problems may be apparent immediately after the accident,
OTHER
or gradually develop over a period of up to three years.
Mayo Clinic Online.5 Mar. 1998 <http://www.mayohealth.org>.
Damage to the respiratory and cardiovascular systems
Belinda Rowland,PhD is most acute at the moment of injury. Electric shocks can
paralyze the respiratory system or disrupt heart action,
EKG see Electrocardiography causing instant death. Also at risk are the smaller veins and
arteries, which dissipate heat less easily than the larger
Elder abuse see Abuse
blood vessels and can develop blood clots. Damage to the
smaller vessels is probably one reason why amputationis
often required following high-voltage injuries.
Many other sorts of injuries are possible after an
electric shock,including cataracts,kidney failure,and
Electric shock injuries
substantial destruction of muscle tissue. The victim may
suffer a fall or be hit by debris from exploding equip-
Definition
ment. An electric arc may set clothing or nearby flamma-
Electric shock injuries are caused by lightning or ble substances on fire. Strong shocks are often accompa-
electric current from a mechanical source passing nied by violent muscle spasms that can break and dislo-
through the body. cate bones. These spasms can also freeze the victim in
place and prevent him or her from breaking away from
the source of the current.
Description
Electric shocks are responsible for about 1,000
Diagnosis
deaths in the United States each year,or about 1% of all
accidental deaths. Diagnosis relies on gathering information about the
circumstances of the accident,a thorough physical exami-
nation,and monitoring of cardiovascular and kidney activ-
Causes and symptoms
ity. The victim’s neurological condition can fluctuate rapid-
The severity of injury depends on the current’s pres- ly and requires close observation. A computed tomography
sure (voltage), the amount of current (amperage), the scan (CT scan) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
type of current (direct vs. alternating),the body’s resis- may be necessary to check for brain injury.
tance to the current,the current’s path through the body,
and how long the body remains in contact with the cur-
Treatment
rent. The interplay of these factors can produce effects
ranging from barely noticeable tingling to instant death; When an electric shock accident happens at home or
every part of the body is vulnerable. Although the severi- in the workplace,the main power should immediately be
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1143
Electric
shock
injuries
Prevention
KEY TERMS
Parents and other adults need to be alert to possible
electric dangers in the home. Damaged electric appliances,
Antibiotics—Substances used against microorgan-
wiring,cords,and plugs should be repaired or replaced.
isms that cause infection. Electrical repairs should be attempted only by people with
Cataract—Clouding of the lens of the eye or its the proper training. Hair dryers,radios,and other electric
capsule (surrounding membrane). appliances should never be used in the bathroom or any-
where else they might accidentally come in contact with
Computed tomography scan (CT scan)—A
water. Young children need to be kept away from electric
process that uses x rays to create three-dimension-
appliances and should be taught about the dangers of elec-
al images of structures inside the body.
tricity as soon as they are old enough. Electric outlets
Electrolytes—Substances that conduct electric
require safety covers in homes with young children.
current within the body and are essential for sus-
During thunderstorms, people should go indoors
taining life.
immediately,even if no rain is falling,and boaters should
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—The use of
return to shore as rapidly as possible. People who cannot
electromagnetic energy to create images of struc-
reach indoor shelter should move away from metallic
tures inside the body.
objects such as golf clubs and fishing rods and lie down in
Skin grafting—A technique in which a piece of low-ground areas. Standing or lying under or next to tall or
healthy skin from the patient’s body (or a donor’s) metallic structures is unsafe. An automobile is appropriate
is used to cover another part of the patient’s body cover,as long as the radio is off. Telephones,computers,
that has lost its skin. hair dryers,and other appliances that can act as conduits
for lightning should not be used during thunderstorms.
Resources
shut off. If that cannot be done,and current is still flowing
BOOKS
through the victim,the alternative is to stand on a dry,non-
Dimick,Alan R. “Electrical Injuries.”In Harrison’s Principles
conducting surface such as a folded newspaper,flattened
of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New
cardboard carton,or plastic or rubber mat and use a non-
York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
conducting object such as a wooden broomstick (never a
damp or metallic object) to push the victim away from the Howard Baker
source of the current. The victim and the source of the cur-
rent must not be touched while the current is still flowing,
for this can electrocute the rescuer. Emergency medical
help should be summoned as quickly as possible. People Electrical nerve stimulation
who are trained to perform cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion (CPR) should, if appropriate, begin first aid while Definition
waiting for emergency medical help to arrive.
Electrical nerve stimulation,also called transcuta-
Burn victims usually require treatment at a burn cen- neous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS),is a noninva-
ter. Fluid replacement therapy is necessary to restore lost sive,drug-free pain managementtechnique. By sending
fluids and electrolytes. Severely injured tissue is repaired electrical signals to underlying nerves,the battery-pow-
surgically,which can involve skin graftingor amputa- ered TENS device can relieve a wide range of chronic
tion. Antibiotics and antibacterial creams are used to and acute pain.
prevent infection. Victims may also require treatment for
kidney failure. Following surgery, physical therapy to
Purpose
facilitate recovery,and psychological counseling to cope
TENS is used to relieve pain caused by a variety of
with disfigurement,may be necessary.
chronic conditions,including:
•neck and lower back pain
Prognosis
•headache/migraine
Electric shocks cause death in 3–15% of cases. Many
•arthritis
survivors require amputation or are disfigured by their
burns. Injuries from household appliances and other low- •post-herpetic neuralgia(lingering chronic pain after an
voltage sources are less likely to produce extreme damage. attack of shingles)
1144 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitalumits
evren
lacirtcelE
•sciatica (pain radiating from lower back, through the
legs,to the foot) KEY TERMS
•temporomandibular joint pain
•osteoarthritis Fibromyalgia—A condition characterized by
aching and stiffness, fatigue and poor sleep, as
•amputation (phantom limb)
well as tenderness at various sites on the body.
•fibromyalgia (a condition causing aching and stiffness
throughout the body) Osteoarthritis—A painful joint disease aggravated
by mechanical stress.
The device is also effective against short-term pain,
such as: Phantom limb—The perception that a limb is pre-
sent (and throbbing with pain) after it has been
•shingles (painful skin eruptions along the nerves)
amputated.
•bursitis (inflammation of tissue surrounding a joint)
Post-herpetic neuralgia—Lingering pain that can
•childbirth
last for years after an attack of shingles.
•post-surgical pain
Sciatica—Pain that radiates along the sciatic
•fractures
nerve, extending from the buttock down the leg to
•muscle and joint pain
the foot.
•sports injuries
Temporomandibular joint pain (TMJ)—Pain and
•menstrual cramps
other symptoms affecting the head, jaw, and face
that are caused when the jaw joints and muscles
Precautions controlling them don’t work together correctly.
Because TENS may interfere with pacemaker func-
tion,patients with pacemakersshould consult a cardiol-
ogist before using a TENS unit. Patients should also
avoid electrical stimulation in the front of the neck, Risks
which can be hazardous. The safety of the device during
TENS is nonaddictive and completely safe. The only
pregnancyhas not been established.
side effect may be a slight skin irritation or redness in
TENS doesn’t cure any condition; it simply eases some people,which can be prevented by using different
pain. Patients who are not sure what is causing their pain gels or electrodes.
should consult a physician before using TENS.
Normal results
Description
The TENS device is a small battery-powered stimu- The amount of relief a person gets using TENS
lator that produces low-intensity electrical signals through depends on the underlying cause of the pain,a person’s
electrodes on or near a painful area,producing a tingling mental state,and whether or not medication is also used.
sensation that reduces pain. There is no dosage limitation, At least one study found that both a real TENS machine
and the patient controls the amount of pain relief. and a placebo were equally effective in reducing pain.
This suggests that at least part of its effectiveness may be
Some experts believe TENS works by blocking pain
due to the patient’s belief in its ability to ease pain.
signals in the spinal cord, or by delivering electrical
impulses to underlying nerve fibers that lessen the expe-
rience of pain. Others suspect that the electrical stimula- Carol A. Turkington
tion triggers the release of natural painkillers in the body.
Patients can rent a TENS unit before buying one,to
see if it is effective against their pain.
Electrical stimulation of
Preparation
the brain
After TENS has been prescribed,a doctor will refer
the patient to a TENS specialist,who will explain how to
Definition
use the machine. The specialist works with the patient to
determine the settings and electrode placements for the Electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) is a rela-
best pain relief. tively new technique used to treat chronic pain and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1145
Electrical
stimulation
of
the
brain
tric stimulation to relieve their symptoms on an as-need-
KEY TERMS ed basis. Patients with failed back syndrome,trigeminal
neuropathy (pertaining to the fifth cranial nerve), and
Infarction—A sudden insuffiency of local blood peripheral neuropathyfared well for pain control with
supply. this treatment, while patients with spinal cord injury
and postherpetic neuralagia (pain along the nerves fol-
Neuralgia—Pain extending along one or more
lowing herpes) did poorly.
nerves.
Neuropathy—A functional disturbance or change
Preparation
in the nervous system.
Parkinson disease—A chronic neurological illness The patient should be free of any type of infection
that causes tremors, stiffness, and difficulty in mov- before undergoing an ESB procedure. He or she may be
ing and walking. advised to discontinue any medication for a prescribed
period of time before surgery.
Aftercare
tremors associated with Parkinson disease. ESB is
administered by passing an electrical current through an After neurosurgery,patients should undergo regular
electrode implanted in the brain. head dressing changes,minimize exposure to others,and
practice good personal hygiene in order to prevent a
brain infection. The head may also be kept elevated for a
Purpose prescribed period of time in order to decrease swelling of
the brain.
While the implantation of electrodes in the brain is
used to treat or diagnose several disorders,the term ESB
is limited here to the treatment of tremors,and as a pain Risks
managementtool for patients suffering from back prob-
The implantation of electrodes into the brain carries
lems and other chronic injuries and illnesses.
risks of hemorrhage,infarction,infection,and cerebral
edema. These complications could cause irreversible
Precautions neurological damage.
An ESB tremor control device, used in treating Patients with an implanted ESB tremor control
Parkinson patients,may interfere with or be affected by device may experience headaches,disequilibrium (a dis-
cardiac pacemakersand other medical equipment. As a turbance of the sense of balance),burning or tingling of
result,patients with other implanted medical equipment the skin,or partial paralysis.
may not be good candidates for the therapy.
Normal results
Description
ESB is effective in pain control for specific condi-
Electrical stimulation of the brain, or deep brain tions. It can provide long-term pain relief with few side
stimulation,is effective in treating tremors in up to 88% effects or complications.
of Parkinson disease patients. An electrode is implanted For the control of tremors a deep brain stimulator
into the thalamus (part of the brain) of the patient,and does provide some relief. It is recommended for patients
attached to an electric pulse generator via an extension with tremors severe enough to affect their quality of life.
wire. The pulse generator is implanted into the patient’s
pectoral,or chest area,and the extension wire is tunneled
Resources
under the skin. The pulse generator sends out intermit-
tent electrical stimulation to the electrode in the thala- PERIODICALS
mus,which inhibits or partially relieves the tremor. The Dewar,Sandra,et al. “Intracranial Electrode Monitoring for
generator can be turned on and off with a magnet, and Seizure Localization:Indications,Methods and Preven-
needs to be replaced every three to five years. tion of Complications.”Journal of Neuroscience Nursing
28,no. 5 (Oct. 1996):. 280 8.
Similar methods have been used to treat chronic pain
Kumar,K.,C. Toth,and R. K. Nath. “Deep Brain Stimulation
that responded unfavorably to conventional therapies. A for Intractable Pain:A 15-Year Experience.”Neurosurgery
remote transmitter allows these patients to trigger elec- 40,no. 4 (Apr. 1997):736 46.
1146 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
niarb
eht
fo
noitalumits
lacirtcelE
Oostra,K.,M. Van Laere,and B. Scheirlinck. “Use of Electri-
cal Stimulation in Brain-Injured Patients:A Case Report.”
Brain Injury11,no. 10 (Oct. 1997):761 4.
OTHER
The Parkinson’s Web.<http://pdweb.mgh.harvard.edu>.
University of Southern California. The ANGEL Neurosurgical
Information Resource.<http://www.usc.edu/hsc/neuro
surgery/angel.html>.
Paula Anne Ford-Martin
Electrocardiography
Definition
Precautions
Electrocardiography is a commonly used,non-inva-
sive procedure for recording electrical changes in the No special precautions are required.
heart. The record,which is called an electrocardiogram
(ECG or EKG),shows the series of waves that relate to
Description
the electrical impulses which occur during each beat of
the heart. The results are printed on paper or displayed The patient disrobes from the waist up, and elec-
on a monitor. The waves in a normal record are named P, trodes (tiny wires in adhesive pads) are applied to specif-
Q,R,S,and T and follow in alphabetical order. The num- ic sites on the arms,legs,and chest. When attached,the
ber of waves may vary,and other waves may be present. electrodes are called leads; three to 12 leads may be
employed.
Purpose Muscle movement may interfere with the recording,
which lasts for several beats of the heart. In cases where
Electrocardiography is a starting point for detecting
rhythm disturbances are suspected to be infrequent,the
many cardiac problems. It is used routinely in physical
patient may wear a small Holter monitor in order to
examinations and for monitoring the patient’s condition
record continuously over a 24-hour period; this is known
during and after surgery,as well as during intensive care.
as ambulatory monitoring.
It is the basic measurement used for tests such as exercise
tolerance. It is used to evaluate causes of symptoms such
Preparation
as chest pain,shortness of breath,and palpitations.
The skin is cleaned to obtain good electrical contact
at the electrode positions.
Aftercare
To avoid skin irritation from the salty gel used to
obtain good electrical contact,the skin should be thor-
oughly cleaned after removal of the electrodes.
Risks
No complications from this procedure have been
observed.
Normal results
When the heart is operating normally,each part con-
tracts in a specific order. Contraction of the muscle is
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1147
Electrocardiography
An EKG strip indicting atrial flutter.(Custom Medical Stock
Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
This EKG strip shows evidence of Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by per-
mission.)
triggered by an electrical impulse. These electrical
impulses travel through specialized cells that form a con-
duction system. Following this pathway ensures that con-
tractions will occur in a coordinated manner.
When the presence of all waves is observed in the
electrocardiogram and these waves follow the order The cause of dysrhythmia is ectopic beats. Ectopic
defined alphabetically,the heart is said to show a normal beats are premature heart beats that arise from a site
sinus rhythm,and impulses may be assumed to be fol- other than the sinus node—commonly from the atria,
lowing the regular conduction pathway. atrioventricular node,or the ventricle. When these dys-
rhythmias are only occasional, they may produce no
The heart is described as showing arrhythmia or dys-
symptoms,or a feeling of the heart turning over or “flip-
rhythmia when time intervals between waves,the order,
flopping” may be experienced. These occasional dys-
or the number of waves do not fit this pattern. Other fea-
rhythmias are common in healthy people,but they also
tures that may be altered include the direction of wave
can be an indication of heart disease.
deflection and wave widths.
In the normal heart,electrical impulses—at a rate of The varied sources of dysrhythmias provide a wide
60–100 times per minute—originate in the sinus node. range of alterations in the form of the electrocardiogram.
The sinus node is located in the first chamber,known as Ectopic beats that start in the ventricle display an abnor-
the right atrium,where blood re-enters the heart. After mal QRS complex. This can indicate disease associated
traveling down to the junction between the upper and with insufficient blood supply to the muscle (myocardial
lower chambers,the signal stimulates the atrioventricular ischemia). Multiple ectopic sites lead to rapid and unco-
node. From here,after a delay,it passes by specialized ordinated contractions of the atria or ventricles. This con-
routes through the lower chambers or ventricles. In many dition is known as fibrillation. In atrial fibrillation, P
disease states,the passage of the electrical impulse can waves are absent,and the QRS complex appears at errat-
be interrupted in a variety of ways,causing the heart to ic intervals,or “irregularly irregular.”
perform less efficiently.
When the atrial impulse fails to reach the ventricle,a
condition known as heart blockresults. If this is partial,
Abnormal results the P-R interval (the time for the impulse to reach the ven-
Special training is required for interpretation of the tricle) is prolonged. If complete,the ventricles beat inde-
electrocardiogram. To summarize the features used in inter- pendently of the atria at about 40 beats per minute,and
pretations in the simplest manner,the P wave of the electro- the QRS complex is mostly dissociated from the P wave.
cardiogram is associated with the contraction of the atria.
The QRS series of waves,or QRS complex,is associated
with ventricular contraction,with the T wave coming after Resources
the contraction. Finally, the P-Q or P-R interval gives a BOOKS
value for the time taken for the electrical impulse to travel Atwood,Sandra,et al. Introduction to Basic Cardiac Dysrhyth-
from the atria to the ventricle (normally less than 0.2 sec). mias.St. Louis:Mosby,1990.
1148 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yhpargoidracortcelE
KEY TERMS
Ambulatory monitoring—ECG recording over a
prolonged period during which the patient can
move around.
Arrhythmia or dysrhythmia—Abnormal rhythm in
hearts that contract in an irregular way.
ECG or EKG—A record of the waves that relate to
the electrical impulses produced at each beat of
the heart.
Electrodes—Tiny wires in adhesive pads that are
applied to the body for ECG measurement.
A patient undergoing electrocardiography.(Russell Curtis,
Photo Researchers.Reproduced by permission.) Fibrillation—Rapid, uncoordinated contractions
of the upper or the lower chambers of the heart.
Lead—Name given the electrode when it is
attached to the skin.
Conover,Mary Boudreau. Understanding Electrocardiogra- Description
phy.St. Louis:Mosby,1996.
Walter,John B. Introduction to the Principles of Disease. The treatment of severe mental illness, such as
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1992. schizophrenia, using electroconvulsive therapy was
introduced in 1938 by two Italian doctors named Cerletti
PERIODICALS
and Bini. In those days many doctors believed that con-
Morton,Patricia Gonce. “Using the 12-Lead ECG to Detect
vulsions were incompatible with schizophrenia since,
Ischemia,Injury,and Infarction.”Critical Care Nurse
according to their obervations, this disease rarely
(Apr. 1996):85-95.
occurred in individuals suffering from epilepsy. They
Van Riper,Sharon,and Ann Luciano. “Basic Cardiac Arrhyth-
mias:A Review for Postanesthesia Care Unit Nurses.” concluded,therefore,that if convulsions could be artifi-
Journal of Postanesthesia Nursing(Feb. 1994):2-13. cally produced in patients with schizophrenia,the illness
could be cured. Some doctors were already using a vari-
ORGANIZATIONS
ety of chemicals to produce seizures,but many of their
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
patients died or suffered severe injuries because the
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
strength of the convulsions could not be well controlled.
Alison M. Grant Electroconvulsive therapy is among the most contro-
versial of all procedures used to treat mental illness.
When it was first introduced,many people were fright-
ened simply because it was called “shock treatment.”
Many assumed the procedure would be painful, others
Electroconvulsive therapy thought it was a form of electrocution, and still others
believed it would cause brain damage. Unfortunately,
Definition unfavorable publicity in newspapers, magazines, and
movies added to these fears.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a medical treat-
ment for severe mental illness in which a small,carefully Indeed, in those early years, patients and families
controlled amount of electricity is introduced into the were rarely educated by doctors and nurses regarding this
brain. This electrical stimulation,used in conjunction with or other forms of psychiatric treatment. In addition,no
anesthesia and muscle relaxant medications,produces a anesthesia or muscle relaxants were used. As a result,
mild generalized seizure or convulsion. While used to treat patients had violent seizures,and even though they did
a variety of psychiatric disorders,it is most effective in the not remember them,the procedure itself was frightening.
treatment of severe depression, and provides the most The way these treatments are given today is very dif-
rapid relief currently available for this illness. ferent from the procedures used in the past. Currently,
ECT is offered on both an inpatient and outpatient basis.
Hospitals have specially equipped rooms with oxygen,
Purpose
suction,and cardiopulmonary resuscitation(CPR) in
The purpose of electroconvulsive therapy is to provide order to deal with the rare emergency.
relief from the signs and symptoms of mental illnesses
The treatment is carried out as follows: approxi-
such as severe depression, mania, and schizophrenia.
mately 30 minutes before the scheduled treatment time,
ECT is indicated when patients need rapid improvement
the patient may receive an injection of a medication
because they are suicidal,self-injurious,refuse to eat or
(such as atropine) that keeps the pulse rate from decreas-
drink,cannot or will not take medication as prescribed,or
ing too much during the convulsion. Next,the patient is
present some other danger to themselves. Antidepressant
placed on a cot and hooked up to a machine that automat-
medications,while effective in many cases,may take two
ically takes and displays vital signs (temperature,pulse,
to six weeks to produce a therapeutic effect. Antipsychotic
respiration,and blood pressure) on a television-like mon-
medications used to treat mania and schizophrenia have
itor. A mild anesthetic is then injected into a vein, fol-
many uncomfortable and sometimes dangerous side
lowed by a medication (such a Anectine) that relaxes all
effects,limiting their use. In addition,some patients devel-
of the muscles in the body so that the seizure is mild,and
op allergiesand therefore are unable to take their medicine.
the risk of broken bones is virtually eliminated.
When the patient is both relaxed and asleep,an air-
Precautions
way is placed in the mouth to aid with breathing. Elec-
The most common risks associated with ECT are trodes are placed on the sides of the head in the temple
disturbances in heart rhythm. Broken or dislocated bones areas. An electric current is passed through the brain by
occur very rarely. means of a machine specifically designed for this pur-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1149
Electroconvulsive
therapy
pose. The usual dose of electricity is 70–150 volts for
0.1–0.5 seconds. In the first stage of the seizure (tonic KEY TERMS
phase),the muscles in the body that have not been para-
lyzed by medication contract for a period of five to 15 Mania—A mood disorder in which a person expe-
seconds. This is followed by the second stage (clonic riences prolonged elation or irritability character-
phase) that is characterized by twitching movements, ized by overactivity that can lead to exhaustion
usually visible only in the toes or in a non-paralyzed arm and medical emergencies.
or leg. These are caused by alternating contraction and
Relapse—A return of the signs and symptoms of
relaxation of these same muscles. This stage lasts
an illness.
approximately 10–60 seconds. The entire procedure,
from beginning to end,lasts about 30 minutes. Schizophrenia—A severe mental illness in which
a person has difficulty distinguishing what is real
The total number of treatments a patient will receive
from what is not real. It is often characterized by
depends upon many factors such as age,diagnosis,the
hallucinations, delusions, and withdrawal from
history of illness,family support,and response to thera-
people and social activities.
py. Patients with depression,for example,usually require
six to 12 treatments. Treatments are usually administered
every other day,three times a week.
The electrodes may be placed on both sides of the
Once the form is signed,the doctor performs a com-
head (bilateral) or one side (unilateral). While bilateral
plete physical examination, and orders a number of
ECT appears to be somewhat more effective,unilateral
tests that can help identify any potential problem. These
ECT is preferred for individuals who experience pro-
tests may include a chest x ray, an electrocardiogram
longed confusion or forgetfulness following treatment.
(ECG),urinalysis,spinal x ray,brain wave (EEG),and
Many doctors begin treatment with unilateral ECT,then
complete blood count(CBC).
change to bilateral if the patient is not improving.
Some medications,such as lithium and a type of anti-
Post-treatment confusion and forgetfulness are com-
depressant known as monoamine oxidase inhibitors,
mon,though disturbing symptoms associated with ECT.
should be discontinued for some time before treatment.
Doctors and nurses must be patient and supportive by
Patients are instructed not to eat or drink for at least eight
providing patients with factual information about recov-
hours prior to the procedure in order to reduce the possi-
ery. Elderly patients,for example,may become increas-
bility of vomiting and choking.
ingly confused and forgetful as the treatments continue.
These symptoms usually subside with time,but a small
Aftercare
minority of patients state that they have never fully
recovered from these effects. After the treatment,patients are moved to a recovery
area. Vital signs are recorded every five minutes until the
With the introduction of antipsychotics in the 1950s,the
patient is fully awake,which may take 15–30 minutes.
use of ECT became less frequent. These new medications
Some initial confusion may be present but usually disap-
provided relief for untold thousands of patients who suffered
pears in a matter of minutes. There may be complaints of
greatly from their illness. However,there are a number of
side effects associated with these drugs,some of which are
headache,muscle pain,or back pain. Such discomfort is
irreversible. Another drawback is that some medications do
quickly relieved by mild medications such as aspirin.
not produce a therapeutic effect for two to six weeks. During
this time the patient may present a danger to himself or oth- Risks
ers. In addition,there are patients who do not respond to
Advanced medical technology has substantially
medicine or who have severe allergic reactions. For these
reduced the complications associated with ECT. These
individuals,ECT may be the only treatment that will help.
include slow heart beat (bradycardia), rapid heart beat
(tachycardia), memory loss, and confusion. Persons at
Preparation high risk for ECT include those with recent heart
attack,uncontrolled blood pressure,brain tumors,and
Patients and relatives are prepared for ECT by being
previous spinal injuries.
shown video tapes that explain both the procedure and the
risks involved. The physician then answers any questions
Normal results
these individuals may have, and the patient is asked to
sign an “Informed Consent Form.”This gives the doctor ECT often produces dramatic improvement in the
and the hospital permission to administer the treatment. signs and symptoms of major depression,especially in
1150 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypareht
evisluvnocortcelE
elderly individuals,sometimes during the first week of An EEG may also be used to monitor brain activity
treatment. While it is estimated that 50% of these during surgery and to determine brain death.
patients will experience a future return of symptoms,the
prognosis for each episode of illness is good. Mania also
Precautions
often responds well to treatment. The picture is not as
bright for schizophrenia,which is more difficult to treat Electroencephalography should be administered and
and is characterized by frequent relapses. interpreted by a trained medical professional only. Data
A few patients are placed on maintenance ECT. This from an EEG is only one element of a complete medical
means they return to the hospital every one to two and/or psychological patient assessment, and should
months, as needed, for an additional treatment. These never be used alone as the sole basis for a diagnosis.
individuals are thus able to keep their illness under con-
trol and lead a normal and productive life.
Description
Resources Before the EEG begins,a nurse or technician attach-
es approximately 16–20 electrodes to the patient’s scalp
BOOKS
with a conductive, washable paste. Depending on the
Antai-Otong,Deborah. Psychiatric Nursing:Biological and
purpose for the EEG,implantable or invasive electrodes
Behavioral Concepts.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,
are occasionally used. Implantable electrodes include
1995.
sphenoidal electrodes, which are fine wires inserted
Haber,Judith,et al. Comprehensive Psychiatric Nursing.St.
Louis:Mosby-Year Book,Inc.,1997. under the zygomatic arch,or cheekbone; and depth elec-
Stuart,Gail W.,and Michele T. Laraia. Principles and Practice trodes, which are surgically-implanted into the brain.
of Psychiatric Nursing.St. Louis:Mosby-Year Book,Inc., The EEG electrodes are painless,and are used to mea-
1998. sure the electrical activity in various regions of the brain.
Townsend,Mary C. Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing:Con-
For the test,the patient lies on a bed,padded table,
cepts of Care.Philadelphia:F. A. Davis Co.,1996.
or comfortable chair and is asked to relax and remain still
ORGANIZATIONS during the EEG testing period. An EEG usually takes no
National Institutes of Health. 5600 Fishers Lane. Room 7CO2, more than one hour. During the test procedure, the
Rockville,MD 20857. (301) 496-4000. <http://www.nih.
patient may be asked to breathe slowly or quickly; visual
gov>.
stimuli such as flashing lights or a patterned board may
be used to stimulate certain types of brain activity.
Donald G. Barstow,RN
Throughout the procedure, the electroencephalograph
machine makes a continuous graphic record of the
Electrocution see Electric shock injuries
patient’s brain activity,or brainwaves,on a long strip of
recording paper or on a computer screen. This graphic
record is called an electroencephalogram.
The sleep EEG uses the same equipment and proce-
dures as a regular EEG. Patients undergoing a sleep EEG
Electroencephalography
are encouraged to fall asleep completely rather than just
relax. They are typically provided a bed and a quiet room
Definition
conducive to sleep. A sleep EEG lasts up to three hours.
Electroencephalography,or EEG,is a neurological
In an ambulatory EEG,patients are hooked up to a
test that uses an electronic monitoring device to measure
portable cassette recorder. They then go about their nor-
and record electrical activity in the brain.
mal activities,and take their normal rest and sleep for a
period of up to 24 hours. During this period,the patient
Purpose and patient’s family record any symptoms or abnormal
behaviors,which can later be correlated with the EEG to
The EEG is a key tool in the diagnosis and manage-
see if they represent seizures.
ment of epilepsy and other seizure disorders. It is also used
to assist in the diagnosis of brain damage and disease (e.g., Many insurance plans provide reimbursement for
stroke,tumors,encephalitis),mental retardation,sleep EEG testing. Costs for an EEG range from $100 to more
disorders,degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s dis- than $500, depending on the purpose and type of test
easeand Parkinson’s disease,and certain mental disor- (i.e.,asleep or awake,and invasive or non-invasive elec-
ders (e.g.,alcoholism,schizophrenia,autism). trodes). Because coverage may be dependent on the dis-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1151
Electroencephalography
order or illness the EEG is evaluating, patients should Risks
check with their individual insurance plan.
Being off medication for one to two days may trigger
seizures. Certain procedures used during EEG may trig-
Preparation
ger seizures in patients with epilepsy. Those procedures
Full instructions should be given to EEG patients include flashing lights and deep breathing. If the EEG is
when they schedule their test. Typically,individuals on being used as a diagnostic for epilepsy (i.e.,to determine
medications that affect the central nervous system,such the type of seizures an individual is suffering from),this
as anticonvulsants, stimulants, or antidepressants, are may be a desired effect,although the patient needs to be
told to discontinue their prescription for a short time monitored closely so that the seizure can be aborted if
prior to the test (usually one to two days). Patients may necessary. This type of test is known as an ictal EEG.
be asked to avoid food and beverages that contain caf-
feine,a central nervous system stimulant. However,any
Normal results
such request should be cleared by the treating physician.
Patients may also be asked to arrive for the test with In reading and interpreting brainwave patterns, a
clean hair free of spray or other styling products. neurologist or other physician will evaluate the type of
brainwaves and the symmetry,location,and consistency
Patients undergoing a sleep EEG may be asked to
of brainwave patterns. He will also look at the brain-
remain awake the night before their test. They may be
wave response to certain stimuli presented during the
given a sedative prior to the test to induce sleep.
EEG test (such as flashing lights or noise). There are
four basic types of brainwaves: alpha, beta, theta, and
Aftercare
delta. “Normal” brainwave patterns vary widely,
If the patient has suspended regular medication for depending on factors of age and activity. For example,
the test,the EEG nurse or technician should advise him awake and relaxed individuals typically register an alpha
when he can begin taking it again. wave pattern of eight to 13 cycles per second. Young
1152 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yhpargolahpecneortcelE
This woman is undergoing an electroencephalogram (EEG) to diagnose Alzheimer’s disease.On the computer screen at the
right are the colored scans of the electrical activity in her brain.Alzheimer’s patients show a specific abnormality in their
EEGs.(Photograph by Catherine Pouedras, Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
Description
Electrolytes are ionized molecules found throughout
the blood, tissues, and cells of the body. These mole-
cules, which are either positive (cations) or negative
(anions),conduct an electric current and help to balance
pH and acid-base levels in the body. Electrolytes also
facilitate the passage of fluid between and within cells
through a process known as osmosisand play a part in
regulating the function of the neuromuscular,endocrine,
and excretory systems.
The serum electrolytes include:
•Sodium (Na). A positively charged electrolyte that
children and sleeping adults may have a delta wave pat- helps to balance fluid levels in the body and facilitates
tern of under four cycles per second. neuromuscular functioning.
•Potassium (K). A main component of cellular fluid,this
Abnormal results positive electrolyte helps to regulate neuromuscular
function and osmotic pressure.
The EEG readings of patients with epilepsy or other
seizure disorders display bursts or spikes of electrical activ- •Calcium (Ca). A cation, or positive electrolyte, that
ity. In focal epilepsy, spikes are restricted to one hemi- affects neuromuscular performance and contributes to
sphere of the brain. If spikes are generalized to both hemi- skeletal growth and blood coagulation.
spheres of the brain,multifocal epilepsy may be present.
•Magnesium (Mg). Influences muscle contractions and
The diagnostic brainwave patterns of other disorders intracellular activity. A cation.
varies widely. The appearance of excess theta waves
•Chloride (CI). An anion, or negative electrolyte, that
(four to eight cycles per second) may indicate brain
regulates blood pressure.
injury. Brain wave patterns in patients with brain disease,
mental retardation,and brain injury show overall slow- •Phosphate (HPO4). Negative electrolyte that impacts
ing. A trained medical specialist should interpret EEG metabolism and regulates acid-base balance and calci-
results in the context of the patient’s medical history,and um levels.
other pertinent medical test results. •Bicarbonate (HCO3). A negatively charged electrolyte
that assists in the regulation of blood pH levels. Bicar-
Resources bonate insufficiencies and elevations cause acid-base
disorders (i.e.,acidosis,alkalosis).
BOOKS
Niedermeyer,E.,and F. Lopes da Silva,eds. Electroen- Medications, chronic diseases, and trauma (i.e.,
cephalography:Basic Principles,Clinical Applications burns,fractures,etc.) may cause the concentration of
and Related Fields.3rd ed. Baltimore:Williams & certain electrolytes in the body to become too high
Wilkins,1993.
(hyper-) or too low (hypo-). When this happens,an elec-
Restak,Richard M. Brainscapes:An Introduction to What Neu-
trolyte imbalance,or disorder,results.
roscience Has Learned About the Structure,Function,and
Abilities of the Brain.New York:Hyperion,1995.
Causes and symptoms
Paula Anne Ford-Martin
Sodium
HYPERNATREMIA. Sodium helps the kidneys to regu-
late the amount of water the body retains or excretes.
Consequently, individuals with elevated serum sodium
Electrolyte disorders
levels also suffer from a loss of fluids,or dehydration.
Hypernatremia can be caused by inadequate water
Definition
intake,excessive fluid loss (i.e.,diabetes insipidus,kid-
An electrolyte disorder is an imbalance of certain ney disease, severe burns, and prolonged vomiting or
ionized salts (i.e.,bicarbonate,calcium,chloride,magne- diarrhea),or sodium retention (caused by excessive sodi-
sium,phosphate,potassium,and sodium) in the blood. um intake or aldosteronism). In addition,certain drugs,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1153
Electrolyte
disorders
KEY TERMS
Epilepsy—A neurological disorder characterized
by recurrent seizures with or without a loss of con-
sciousness.
Ictal EEG—Used to measure brain activity during
a seizure. May be useful in learning more about
patients who aren’t responding to conventional
treatments.
including loop diuretics,corticosteroids,and antihyper- •weakness
tensive medications may cause elevated sodium levels.
•nausea and/or abdominal pain
Symptoms of hypernatremia include:
•irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
•thirst
•diarrhea
•orthostatic hypotension
•muscle pain
•dry mouth and mucous membranes
HYPOKALEMIA. Severe dehydration,aldosteronism,
•dark,concentrated urine
Cushing’s syndrome,kidney disease,long-term diuretic
•loss of elasticity in the skin therapy, certain penicillins, laxative abuse, congestive
•irregular heartbeat (tachycardia) heart failure, and adrenal gland impairments can all
cause depletion of potassium levels in the bloodstream. A
•irritability
substance known as glycyrrhetinic acid,which is found
•fatigue
in licorice and chewing tobacco,can also deplete potassi-
•lethargy um serum levels. Symptoms of hypokalemiainclude:
•heavy,labored breathing •weakness
•muscle twitching and/or seizures •paralysis
HYPONATREMIA. Up to 1% of all hospitalized •increased urination
patients develop hyponatremia, making it one of the •irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
most common electrolyte disorders. Diuretics, certain
•orthostatic hypotension
psychoactive drugs (i.e.,fluoxetine,sertraline,haloperi-
•muscle pain
dol), specific antipsychotics (lithium), vasopressin,
chlorpropamide, the illicit drug “ecstasy”, and other •tetany
pharmaceuticals can cause decreased sodium levels,or
hyponatremia. Low sodium levels may also be triggered Calcium
by inadequate dietary intake of sodium,excessive perspi-
HYPERCALCEMIA. Blood calcium levels may be ele-
ration, water intoxication, and impairment of adrenal
vated in cases of thyroid disorder, multiple myeloma,
gland or kidney function.
metastatic cancer,multiple bone fractures,milk-alkali
Symptoms of hyponatremia include: syndrome,and Paget’s disease. Excessive use of calci-
um-containing supplements and certain over-the-counter
•nausea,abdominal cramping,and/or vomiting
medications (i.e., antacids) may also cause hypercal-
•headache
cemia. Symptoms include:
•edema (swelling)
•fatigue
•muscle weakness and/or tremor
•constipation
•paralysis
•depression
•disorientation
•confusion
•slowed breathing
•muscle pain
•seizures
•nausea and vomiting
•coma
•dehydration
•increased urination
Potassium
•irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
HYPERKALEMIA. Hyperkalemiamay be caused by
ketoacidosis (diabetic coma), myocardial infarction HYPOCALCEMIA. Thyroid disorders,kidney failure,
(heart attack), severe burns, kidney failure, fasting, severe burns,sepsis,vitamin D deficiency,and medica-
bulimia nervosa, gastrointestinal bleeding, adrenal tions such as heparin and glucogan can deplete blood cal-
insufficiency, or Addison’s disease. Diuretic drugs, cium levels. Lowered levels cause:
cyclosporin, lithium, heparin, ACE inhibitors, beta •muscle cramps and spasms
blockers,and trimethoprim can increase serum potassi-
•tetany and/or convulsions
um levels,as can heavy exercise. The condition may also
•mood changes (depression,irritability)
be secondary to hypernatremia (low serum concentra-
tions of sodium). Symptoms may include: •dry skin
1154 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sredrosid
etylortcelE
•brittle nails •paralysis
•facial twitching •muscle tension or spasm
Magnesium
Phosphate
HYPERMAGNESEMIA. Excessive magnesium levels
HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA. Skeletal fractures or dis-
may occur with end-stage renal disease,Addison’s dis-
ease,kidney failure,hypoparathyroidism,hemodialy-
ease,or an overdose of magnesium salts. Hypermagne-
sis,diabetic ketoacidosis,acromegaly,systemic infec-
semia is characterized by:
tion,and intestinal obstruction can all cause phosphate
•lethargy retention and build-up in the blood. The disorder occurs
•hypotension concurrently with hypocalcemia. Individuals with mild
hyperphosphatemia are typically asymptomatic, but
•decreased heart and respiratory rate
signs of severe hyperphosphatemia include:
•muscle weakness
•tingling in hands and fingers
•diminished tendon reflexes
•muscle spasms and cramps
HYPOMAGNESEMIA. Inadequate dietary intake of
magnesium,often caused by chronic alcoholismor mal- •convulsions
nutrition, is a common cause of hypomagnesemia. •cardiac arrest
Other causes include malabsorption syndromes,pancre-
atitis, aldosteronism, burns, hyperparathyroidism, HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA. Serum phosphate levels of 2
digestive system disorders,and diuretic use. Symptoms mg/dL or below may be caused by hypomagnesemia and
of low serum magnesium levels include: hypokalemia. Severe burns,alcoholism,diabetic ketoaci-
dosis, kidney disease, hyperparathyroidism, hypothy-
•leg and foot cramps
roidism,Cushing’s syndrome,malnutrition,hemodialy-
•weight loss sis,vitamin D deficiency,and prolonged diuretic therapy
•vomiting can also diminish blood phosphate levels. There are typi-
cally few physical signs of mild phosphate depletion.
•muscle spasms,twitching,and tremors
Symptoms of severe hypophosphatemia include:
•seizures
•muscle weakness
•muscle weakness
•weight loss
•arrthymia
•bone deformities (osteomalacia)
Chloride
HYPERCHLOREMIA. Severe dehydration,kidney fail- Diagnosis
ure,hemodialysis,traumatic brain injury,and aldostero-
Diagnosis is performed by a physician or other quali-
nism can also cause hyperchloremia. Drugs such as boric
fied healthcare provider who will take a medical history,
acid and ammonium chloride and the intravenous (IV)
discuss symptoms,perform a complete physical exami-
infusion of sodium chloride can also boost chloride lev-
nation, and prescribe appropriate laboratory tests.
els, resulting in hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis.
Because electrolyte disorders commonly affect the neuro-
Symptoms include:
muscular system,the provider will test reflexes. If a calci-
•weakness um imbalance is suspected,the physician will also check
•headache for Chvostek’s sign,a reflex test that triggers an involun-
tary facial twitch,and Trousseau’s sign,a muscle spasm
•nausea
that occurs in response to pressure on the upper arm.
•cardiac arrest
Serum electrolyte imbalances can be detected
HYPOCHLOREMIA. Hypochloremia usually occurs through blood tests. Blood is drawn from a vein on the
as a result of sodium and potassium depletion (i.e.,
back of the hand or inside of the elbow by a medical
hyponatremia,hypokalemia). Severe depletion of serum
technician,or phlebotomist,and analyzed at a lab.
chloride levels causes metabolic alkalosis. This alkaliza-
tion of the bloodstream is characterized by: Normal levels of electrolytes are:
•mental confusion •Sodium. 135–145 mEq/L (serum)
•slowed breathing •Potassium. 3.5–5.5 mEq/L (serum)
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1155
Electrolyte
disorders
trolyte involved. If the disorder is caused by poor diet or
KEY TERMS improper fluid intake, nutritional changes may be pre-
scribed. If medications such as diuretics triggered the
Acid-base balance—A balance of acidity and imbalance,discontinuing or adjusting the drug therapy
alkalinity of fluids in the body that keeps the pH may effectively treat the condition. Fluid and electrolyte
level of blood around 7.35–7.45. replacement therapy,either intravenously or by mouth,
can reverse electrolyte depletion.
Aldosteronism—A condition defined by high
serum levels of aldosterone, a hormone secreted Hemodialysis treatment may be required to reduce
by the adrenal gland that is responsible for serum potassium levels in hyperkalemic patients with
increasing sodium reabsorption in the kidneys. impaired kidney function. It may also be recommended
for renal patients suffering from severe hypermagnesemia.
Addison’s disease—A disease characterized by a
deficiency in adrenocortical hormones due to
destruction of the adrenal gland. Prognosis
Bulimia nervosa—An eating disorder character- A patient’s long-term prognosis depends upon the
ized by binging and purging (self-induced vomit- root cause of the electrolyte disorder. However, when
ing) behaviors. treated quickly and appropriately,electrolyte imbalances
Milk-alkali syndrome—Elevated blood calcium in and of themselves are usually effectively reversed.
levels and alkalosis caused by excessive intake of When they are mild, some electrolyte imbalances
milk and alkalis. Usually occurs in the treatment have few to no symptoms and may pass unnoticed. For
of peptic ulcer. example,transient hyperphosphatemia is usually fairly
Orthostatic hypotension—A drop in blood pres- benign. However, long-term elevations of blood phos-
sure that causes faintness or dizziness and occurs phate levels can lead to potentially fatal soft tissue and
when one rises to a standing position. Also known vascular calcifications and bone disease, and severe
as postural hypotension. serum phosphate deficiencies (hypophosphatemia) can
cause encephalopathy,coma,and death.
Osmotic pressure—Pressure that occurs when two
solutions of differing concentrations are separated Severe hypernatremia has a mortality rate of
by a semipermeable membrane, such as a cellular 40–60%. Death is commonly due to cerebrovascular
wall, and the lower concentration solute is drawn damage and hemorrhage resulting from dehydration and
across the membrane into the higher concentra- shrinkage of the brain cells.
tion solute (osmosis).
Tetany—A disorder of the nervous system charac- Prevention
terized by muscle cramps, spasms of the arms and
Physicians should use caution when prescribing
legs, and numbness of the extremities.
drugs known to affect electrolyte levels and acid-base
balance. Individuals with kidney disease,thyroid prob-
lems,and other conditions that may place them at risk for
developing an electrolyte disorder should be educated on
•Calcium. 8.8–10.4 mg/dL (total Ca; serum); 4.7–5.2
the signs and symptoms.
mg/dL (unbound Ca; serum)
•Magnesium. 1.4–2.1 mEq/L (plasma)
Resources
•Chloride. 100–108 mEq/L (serum)
BOOKS
•Phosphate. 2.5–4.5 mg/dL (plasma; adults) Post,Theodore,and Burton Rose. Clinical Physiology of Acid-
Base and Electrolyte Disorders,5th ed.New York:
Standard ranges for test results may vary due to dif-
McGraw-Hill Professional,2001.
fering laboratory standards and physiological variances
(i.e., gender, age, and other factors). Other blood tests PERIODICALS
that determine pH levels and acid-base balance may also Cohn,Jay N.,et al. “New Guidelines for Potassium Replacement
be performed. in Clinical Practice:A Contemporary Review by the Nation-
al Council on Potassium in Clinical Practice.”Archives of
Internal Medicine160,no.16 (Sept. 11,2000):2429 36.
Treatment Kumar,Sumit and Tomas Berl. “Sodium.”The Lancet352,no.
9123 (18,July 1998):220.
Treatment of electrolyte disorders depends on the
underlying cause of the problem and the type of elec- Paula Ford-Martin
1156 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sredrosid
etylortcelE
or are intracellular,while others tend to be outside cells,
Electrolyte tests or are extracellular. Potassium,phosphate,and magne-
sium occur at much greater levels inside the cell than
Definition
outside,while sodium and chloride occur at much greater
Electrolytes are positively and negatively charged levels extracellularly. A second classification distinguish-
molecules, called ions, that are found within cells, es those electrolytes that participate directly in the trans-
between cells, in the bloodstream, and in other fluids mission of nerve impulses and those that do not. Sodium,
throughout the body. Electrolytes with a positive charge potassium, and calcium are the important electrolytes
include sodium,potassium,calcium,and magnesium; the involved in nerve impulses,and disorders affecting them
negative ions are chloride,bicarbonate,and phosphate. are most closely associated with neurological disorders.
The concentrations of these ions in the bloodstream A third classification focuses on electrolytes that are able
remain fairly constant throughout the day in a healthy to form a tight union,or complex,with one another. Cal-
person. Changes in the concentration of one or more of cium and phosphate have the greatest tendency to form
these ions can occur during various acute and chronic complexes with each other. Disorders that cause an
disease states and can lead to serious consequences. increase in either plasma calcium or phosphate can result
in the deposit of calcium-phosphate crystals in the soft
tissues of the body. A fourth classification concerns those
Purpose
electrolytes that influence the acidity or alkalinity of the
Tests that measure the concentration of electrolytes bloodstream,also known as the pH. The pH of the blood-
are useful in the emergency room and to obtain clues for stream is normally in the range of 7.35–7.45. A decrease
the diagnosis of specific diseases. Electrolyte tests are below this range is called acidosis,while a pH above this
used for diagnosing dietary deficiencies,excess loss of range is called alkalosis. The electrolytes most closely
nutrients due to urination, vomiting, and diarrhea, or associated with the pH of the bloodstream are bicarbon-
abnormal shifts in the location of an electrolyte within ate,chloride,and phosphate.
the body. When an abnormal electrolyte value is detect-
ed,the physician may either act to immediately correct Preparation
the imbalance directly (in the case of an emergency) or
All electrolyte tests can be performed on plasma or
run further tests to determine the underlying cause of the
serum. Plasma is prepared by withdrawing a blood sam-
abnormal electrolyte value. Electrolyte disturbances can
ple and placing it in a test tube containing a chemical that
occur with malfunctioning of the kidney (renal failure),
prevents blood from clotting (an anticoagulant). Serum is
infections that produce severe and continual diarrhea or
prepared by withdrawing a blood sample,placing it in a
vomiting, drugs that cause loss of electrolytes in the
test tube,and allowing it to clot. The blood spontaneously
urine (diuretics),poisoningdue to accidental consump-
clots within a minute of withdrawing the blood from a
tion of electrolytes,or diseases involving hormones that
vein. The serum or plasma is then rapidly spun with a
regulate electrolyte concentrations.
centrifuge in order to remove the blood cells or clot.
Precautions
Normal results
Electrolyte tests are performed from routine blood
Electrolyte concentrations are similar whether mea-
tests. The techniques are simple,automated,and fairly
sured in serum or plasma. Values can be expressed in
uniform throughout the United States. During the prepa-
terms of weight per unit volume (mg/deciliter; mg/dL) or
ration of blood plasma or serum, health workers must
in the number of molecules in a volume, or molarity
take care not to break the red blood cells, especially
(moles or millimoles/liter; M or mM). The range of nor-
when testing for serum potassium. Because the concen-
mal values sometimes varies slightly between different
tration of potassium within red blood cells is much high-
age groups,for males and females,and between different
er than in the surrounding plasma or serum,broken cells
analytical laboratories.
would cause falsely elevated potassium levels.
The normal level of serum sodium is in the range of
136–145 mM. The normal levels of serum potassium are
Description
3.5–5.0 mM. Note that sodium occurs at a much higher
Electrolyte tests are typically conducted on blood concentration than potassium. The normal concentration
plasma or serum,urine,and diarrheal fluids. Electrolytes of total serum calcium (bound calcium plus free calcium)
can be classified in at least five different ways. One way is in the range of 8.8–10.4 mg/dL. About 40% of the total
is that some electrolytes tend to exist mostly inside cells, calcium in the plasma is loosely bound to proteins; this
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1157
Electrolyte
tests
calcium is referred to as bound calcium. The normal range usually occurs when the body dissolves bone at an abnor-
of free calcium is 4.8–5.2 mg/dL. The normal concentra- mally fast rate,increasing both serum calcium and serum
tion of serum magnesium is in the range of 2.0–3.0 mg/dL. phosphate. Sudden hypercalcemia can cause vomiting
and coma,while prolonged and moderate hypercalcemia
The normal concentration range of chloride is
results in the deposit of calcium phosphate crystals in the
350–375 mg/dL or 98–106 mM. The normal level of
kidneys and eye. Hypocalcemiaoccurs when serum free
phosphate,as expressed as the concentration of phospho-
calcium ions fall below 4.4 mg/dL,or when total serum
rus,is 2.0–4.3 mg/dL. Bicarbonate is an electrolyte that
calcium falls below 8.8 mg/dL. Hypocalcemia can result
is freely and spontaneously interconvertable with carbon-
from hypoparathyroidism(low parathyroid hormone),
ic acid and carbon dioxide. The normal concentration of
from failure to produce 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D,from
carbonic acid (HCO) is about 1.35 mM. The normal
2 3 low levels of plasma magnesium, and from phosphate
concentration of bicarbonate (HCO(cid:1)) is about 27 mM.
3 poisoning (the phosphate enters the bloodstream and
The concentration of total carbon dioxide is the sum of
forms a complex with the free serum calcium). Hypocal-
carbonic acid and bicarbonate; this sum is normally in
cemia can cause depression and muscle spasms.
the range of 26–28 mM. The ratio of bicarbonate/carbon-
ic acid is more significant than the actual concentrations Hypermagnesemia occurs at serum magnesium lev-
of these two forms of carbon dioxide. Its normal value is els over 25 mM (60 mg/dL). Hypermagnesemia is rare
27/1.35 (equivalent to 20/1). but can occur with the excessive consumption of magne-
sium salts. Hypomagnesemia occurs when serum magne-
sium levels fall below 0.8 mM,and can result from poor
Abnormal results nutrition. Chronic alcoholism is the most common
cause of hypomagnesemia,in part because of poor diet.
Positively charged electrolytes
Magnesium levels below 0.5 mM (1.2 mg/dL) cause
High serum sodium levels (hypernatremia) occur at serum calcium levels to decline. Some of the symptoms
sodium concentrations over 145 mM,with severe hyper- of hypomagnesemia, including twitching and convul-
natremia over 152 mM. Hypernatremia is usually caused sions,actually result from the concurrent hypocalcemia.
by diseases that cause excessive urination. In these cases, Hypomagnesemia can also result in hypokalemia and
water is lost,but sodium is still retained in the body. The thereby cause cardiac arrhythmias.
symptoms include confusion and can lead to convulsions
and coma. Low serum sodium levels (hyponatremia) are
below 130 mM,with severe hyponatremia at or below 125 Negatively charged electrolytes
mM. Hyponatremia often occurs with severe diarrhea,
Serum chloride levels sometimes increase to abnor-
with losses of both water and sodium, but with sodium
mal levels as an undesirable side effect of medical treat-
loss exceeding water loss. Hyponatremia provokes clinical
ment with sodium chloride or ammonium chloride. The
problems only if serum sodium falls below 125 mM,espe-
toxicity of chloride results not from the chloride itself,but
cially if this has occurred rapidly. The symptoms can be as
from the fact that the chloride occurs as the acid,hydro-
mild as tiredness but may lead to convulsions and coma.
gen chloride (more commonly known as hydrochloric
High serum potassium (hyperkalemia) occurs at acid, or HCl). An overdose of chloride may cause the
potassium levels above 5.0 mM; it is considered severe accumulation of hydrochloric acid in the bloodstream,
over 8.0 mM. Hyperkalemia is relatively uncommon,but with consequent acidosis. Renal tubular acidosis,one of
sometimes occurs in patients with kidney failure who take many kidney diseases,involves the failure to release acid
potassium supplements. Hyperkalemia can result in abnor- into the urine. The acidosis produces weakness,
mal beating of the heart (cardiac arrhythmias). Low headache,nausea,and cardiac arrest. Low plasma chlo-
serum potassium (hypokalemia) occurs when serum ride leads to the opposite situation:a decline in the acid
potassium falls below 3.0 mM. It can result from low content of the bloodstream. This is known as alkalization
dietary potassium,as during starvationor in patients with of the bloodstream,or alkalosis. Hydrochloric acid,origi-
anorexia nervosa; from excessive losses via the kidneys, nally from extracellular fluids,can be lost by vomiting. At
as caused by diuretic drugs; or by diseases of the adrenal its most severe,alkalosis results in paralysis (tetany).
or pituitary glands. Mild hypokalemia causes muscle
Hyperphosphatemia occurs at serum phosphate levels
weakness,while severe hypokalemia can cause paralysis,
above 5 mg/dL. It can result from the failure of the kidneys
the inability to breathe,and cardiac arrhythmias.
to excrete phosphate into the urine,causing phosphate to
High levels of calcium ions (hypercalcemia) occur accumulate in the bloodstream. Hyperphosphatemia can
at free calcium ion concentrations over 5.2 mg/dL or also be caused by the impaired action of parathyroid hor-
total serum calcium above 10.4 mg/dL. Hypercalcemia mone and by phosphate poisoning. Severe hyperphos-
1158 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stset
etylortcelE
phatemia can cause paralysis, convulsions, and cardiac Klahr,S. “Acid-base and Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders.”In
arrest. These symptoms result because the phosphate, Textbook of Primary Care Medicine,ed. J. Noble. St.
occurring in elevated levels,complexes with free serum Louis:Mosby,1996.
calcium,resulting in hypocalcemia. Tests for heart func-
PERIODICALS
tion (an electrocardiogram) and parathyroid hormone lev-
Fried,L. F.,and P. M. Palevsky. “Hyponatremia and hyperna-
els are used in the diagnosis of hyperphosphatemia. tremia.”Medical Clinics of North America81 (1997):
Hypophosphatemia occurs if serum phosphorus falls to 585-609.
2.0 mg/dL or lower. It often results from a shift of inorgan- Sutters,M.,C. L. Gaboury,and W. M. Bennett. “Severe Hyper-
ic phosphate from the bloodstream to various organs and phosphatemia and Hypocalcemia:a Dilemma in Patient
tissues. This shift can be caused by a rise in pH (alkaliza- Management.”Journal of the American Society of
tion) of the bloodstream,which can occur during hyper- Nephrology7 (1996):2056-2061.
ventilation,a reaction in various disease states. A shift in
phosphate to intracellular tissues may draw calcium away Tom Brody,PhD
from the bloodstream via the formation of insoluble calci-
um phosphate crystals within cells, with consequent
hypocalcemia. Thus,tests for abnormalities in phosphate
metabolism also involve tests for serum calcium.
Electromyography
Bicarbonate metabolism involves several com-
pounds. When dietary starches,sugars,and fats are bro-
Definition
ken down for energy production,carbon dioxide is creat-
ed. Much of this carbon dioxide (CO) spontaneously Electromyography (EMG) is an electrical recording
2
converts to carbonic acid (HCO),and some of the car- of muscle activity that aids in the diagnosis of neuromus-
2 3
bonic acid spontaneously converts to bicarbonate cular disease.
(HCO(cid:1)) plus a hydrogen ion (H+). Eventually, almost
3
every molecule of carbon dioxide produced in the body,
Purpose
whether in the form of carbon dioxide,carbonic acid,or
bicarbonate, must convert back to carbon dioxide in Muscles are stimulated by signals from nerve cells
order to leave via the lungs during normal breathing. called motor neurons. This stimulation causes electrical
activity in the muscle,which in turn causes contraction.
If one holds one’s breath, carbon dioxide cannot
This electrical activity is detected by a needle electrode
escape from the lungs,but continues to be generated with-
inserted into the muscle and connected to a recording
in the body. This results in an increase in production of
device. Together,the electrode and recorder are called an
carbonic acid. A portion of the carbonic acid breaks apart
electromyography machine. EMG can determine whether
(dissociates),causing an increase in hydrogen ions in the
a particular muscle is responding appropriately to stimu-
plasma,with a resulting acidosis. Tests for serum bicar-
lation,and whether a muscle remains inactive when not
bonate levels are accompanied by tests for acidosis (pH
stimulated.
test). Conversely,when one breathes too rapidly (hyper-
EMG is performed most often to help diagnose dif-
ventilation), the carbon dioxide is drawn off from the
ferent diseases causing weakness. Although EMG is a
bloodstream and expelled in the breath at an increased
test of the motor system,it may help identify abnormali-
rate. This results in an increase in the rate of combination
ties of nerves or spinal nerve roots that may be associated
of bicarbonate with hydrogen ions,resulting in alkalosis.
Acidosis and alkalosis can be produced by means other
with painor numbness. Other symptoms for which EMG
may be useful include numbness,atrophy,stiffness,fas-
than by altering the rate of breathing. The carbonic acid
ciculation,cramp,deformity,and spasticity. EMG results
and bicarbonate in the bloodstream minimize (or buffer)
can help determine whether symptoms are due to a mus-
any trend to acidosis or alkalosis. Tests for bicarbonate
cle disease or a neurological disorder,and,when com-
are generally accompanied by tests for blood pH and pos-
bined with clinical findings, usually allow a confident
sibly tests for kidney malfunction, abnormal hormone
diagnosis.
function,or gastrointestinal disorders.
EMG can help diagnose many muscle and nerve dis-
orders,including:
Resources
•muscular dystrophy
BOOKS
•congenital myopathies
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997. •mitochondrial myopathies
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1159
Electromyography
similar to a mild shock from static electricity. Evoked
KEY TERMS potentials may also be performed for additional diagnos-
tic information. Nerve conduction velocity and evoked
Motor neurons—Nerve cells that transmit signals potential testing are especially helpful when pain or sen-
from the brain or spinal cord to the muscles. sory complaints are more prominent than weakness.
Motor unit action potentials—Spikes of electrical
activity recorded during an EMG that reflect the Preparation
number of motor units (motor neurons and the
No special preparation is needed. The doctor super-
muscle fibers they transmit signals to) activated
vising and interpreting the test should be given informa-
when the patient voluntarily contracts a muscle.
tion about the symptoms,medical conditions,suspected
diagnosis,neuroimaging studies,and other test results.
•metabolic myopathies Aftercare
•myotonias Minor pain and bleeding may continue for several
•peripheral neuropathies hours after the test. The muscle may be tender for a day
or two.
•radiculopathies
•nerve lesions
Risks
•amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
There are no significant risks to this test,other than
•polio
those associated with any needle insertion (pain,bleed-
•spinal muscular atrophy
ing,bruising,or infection).
•guillain-Barré syndrome
•ataxias
Normal results
•myasthenias
There should be some brief EMG activity during
needle insertion. This activity may be increased in dis-
Precautions
eases of the nerve and decreased in long-standing muscle
No special precautions are needed for this test. disorders where muscle tissue is replaced by fibrous tis-
Patients with a history of bleeding disorder should con- sue or fat. Muscle tissue normally shows no EMG activi-
sult with their treating physician before the test. If a mus- ty when at rest or when moved passively by the examin-
cle biopsy is planned as part of the diagnostic work-up, er. When the patient actively contracts the muscle,spikes
EMG should not be performed at the same site,as it may (motor unit action potentials) should appear on the
effect the microscopic appearance of the muscle. recording screen,reflecting the electrical activity within.
As the muscle is contracted more forcefully,more groups
Description of muscle fibers are recruited or activated,causing more
EMG activity.
During an EMG test, a fine needle is inserted into
the muscle to be tested. This may cause some discomfort,
similar to that of an injection. Recordings are made while Abnormal results
the muscle is at rest,and then during the contraction. The
The interpretation of EMG results is not a simple
person performing the test may move the limb being test-
matter,requiring analysis of the onset,duration,ampli-
ed,and direct the patient to move it with various levels of
tude,and other characteristics of the spike patterns.
force. The needle may be repositioned in the same mus-
cle for further recording. Other muscles may be tested as Electrical activity at rest is abnormal; the particular
well. A typical session lasts from 30–60 minutes. pattern of firing may indicate denervation (for example,a
nerve lesion, radiculopathy, or lower motor neuron
A slightly different test,the nerve conduction veloci-
degeneration),myotonia,or inflammatory myopathy.
ty test,is often performed at the same time with the same
equipment. In this test,stimulating and recording elec- Decreases in the amplitude and duration of spikes
trodes are used,and small electrical shocks are applied to are associated with muscle diseases, which also show
measure the ability of the nerve to conduct electrical sig- faster recruitment of other muscle fibers to compensate
nals. This test may cause mild tingling and discomfort for weakness. Recruitment is reduced in nerve disorders.
1160 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yhpargoymortcelE
Resources
BOOKS
Basmajian,J.,and C. DeLuca. Muscles Alive:Their Function
Revealed by Electromyography.5th ed. Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins,1985.
OTHER
Falck,B.,E. Stalberg,and L. Korpinen. The Expert Elec-
tromyographer.<http://www.tut.fi/~korpinen/EMG.htm>.
Richard Robinson
Electronic fetal monitoring
Definition
Electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) is a method for
examining the condition of a baby in the uterus by noting
any unusual changes in its heart rate. Electronic fetal moni-
toring is performed late in pregnancyor continuously dur-
ing labor to ensure normal delivery of a healthy baby. EFM
can be utilized either externally or internally in the womb.
Purpose
The heart rate of a fetus undergoes constant adjust-
ment as it responds to its environment and other stimuli. the unborn baby, which can be detected by electronic
The fetal monitor records an unborn baby’s heart rate and fetal monitoring.
graphs it on a piece of paper. Electronic fetal monitoring
The fetal monitor is a more intricate version of the
is usually advised for high-risk pregnancies, when the
machine that a health care provider uses to listen to a baby’s
baby is in danger of distress. Specific reasons for EFM
heartbeat. The monitor that is used during prenatal visits just
include:babies in a breech position,premature labor,
picks up the sound of the baby’s heart beating. The fetal
and induced labor,among others.
monitor also keeps a continuous paper record of the heart
When electronic fetal monitoring was originally rate. In addition,the fetal monitor can record uterine con-
introduced in the 1960s and 1970s,the hope was that it tractions on the lower part of the paper strip. This helps the
would help physicians diagnose fetal hypoxia,or lack of doctor or midwife determine how a baby is handling the
oxygen,in time to prevent damage to the baby. This lack stressof contractions. The normal pattern is for the baby’s
of oxygen, also known as perinatal asphyxia or birth heartbeat to drop slightly during a contraction and then go
asphyxia,is an important cause of stillbirthand newborn back to normal after the contraction is over. EFM looks for
deaths. It occurs when there are less than normal any changes from this normal pattern,particularly if there is
amounts of oxygen delivered to the body or an organ and a drastic drop in the baby’s heart beat or if the heart rate
there is build-up of carbon dioxide in the body or tissue. does not recover immediately after a contraction.
A lack of blood flow to an organ can cause asphyxia.
Because it is an indirect test,it is not perfect. When
Perinatal asphyxia can occur a long time before birth,
an adult complains to a provider about not feeling well,
shortly before birth,during delivery,or after birth. If the
checking the heart rate is only one of many things that
interruption to the supply of oxygen is short, the baby
the doctor will do. With an unborn baby,however,check-
may recover without any damage. If the time is longer,
ing the heart rate is basically the only thing that a doctor
there may be some injury that is reversible. If the time
or midwife can do.
period without oxygen is very long,there may be perma-
nent injury to one or more organs of the body. It is impor- Fetal monitoring can be helpful in a variety of differ-
tant,to detect any signs of asphyxia as soon as possible. ent situations. During pregnancy,fetal monitoring can be
One of the signs is an abnormal heart rate and rhythm in used as a part of antepartum testing. If the practitioner
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1161
Electronic
fetal
monitoring
Umbilical cord
Pubic bone
Intrauterine
pressure catheter
Vagina
Electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) is performed late in preg-
nancy or continuously during labor to ensure normal deliv-
ery of a healthy baby.EFM can be utilized either externally
or internally in the womb.The illustration above shows the
internal procedure,in which an electrode is attached direct-
ly to the baby’s scalp to monitor the heart rate.Uterine con-
tractions are recorded using an intrauterine pressure
catheter which is inserted through the cervix into the
uterus.(Illustration by the Electronic Illustrators Group.)
Risks
KEY TERMS
External EFM poses no direct risks to the baby. How-
ever, because of being connected to the machine, the
Breech presentation—Fetal position in which the
mother cannot walk around. This inactivity may prolong
buttocks come first.
labor and reduce oxygen levels in the mother’s blood,both
A cesarean section—delivery of a baby through an of which can be detrimental to the unborn baby. Another
incision in the mother’s abdomen instead of problem is that electronic fetal monitoring seems to be
through the vagina. associated with an increase in caesarian deliveries. There
is a concern that EFM can give false alarms of distress in
Hypoxia—An oxygen deficiency.
the baby,and that this can lead to unneeded caesarians.
With internal monitoring,there is a higher risk for infec-
tion. For these and other reasons,the United States Pre-
ventive Services Task Force states that there is some evi-
feels that a baby may be at increased risk of problems
dence that using electronic fetal monitoring on low-risk
toward the end of pregnancy, a baby can be checked
women in labor might not be indicated. Many physicians,
every week or every other week with a non-stress test. In
however,continue to use EFM routinely,and believe it to
this test,changes in the baby’s heart rate are measured
be of value in both low-risk and high-risk labors.
along with the fetus’own movements. The heart rate of a
healthy baby should go up whenever she or he moves.
Normal results
Fetal monitoring is used on and off during early
labor. As labor progresses, more monitoring is often An unborn baby’s heart rate normally ranges from
needed. Usually,as the time for delivery nears,the moni- 120–160 beats per minute (bpm). A baby who is receiv-
tor is left on continuously since the end of labor tends to ing enough oxygen through the placenta will move
be the most stressful time for the baby. around. The monitor strip will show the baby’s heart rate
rising briefly as he/she moves (just as an adult’s heart
A baby who is having trouble in labor will show char-
rate rises when he/she moves).
acteristic changes in heart rate after a contraction (late
decelerations). If a baby is not receiving enough oxygen to The baby’s monitor strip is considered to be reactive
withstand the stress of labor and delivery is many hours when the baby’s heart rate rises at least 20 bpm above the
away,a cesarean section(C-section) may be necessary. baseline heart rate for at least 20 seconds. This must
occur at least twice in a 20-minute period. A reactive
heart rate tracing (also known as a reactive non-stress
Description
test) is considered a sign of the baby’s well being.
Using the external fetal monitor is simple and painless.
Two elastic belts are placed around the mother’s abdomen.
Abnormal results
One belt holds a listening device in place while the other
belt holds the contraction monitor. The nurse or midwife If the baby’s heart rate drops very low or rises very
adjusts the belts to get the best readings from each device. high, this signals a serious problem. In either of these
cases it is obvious that the baby is in distress and must be
Sometimes,it is difficult to hear the baby’s heartbeat
delivered soon. However,many babies who are having
with the external monitoring device. Other times, the
problems do not give such clear signs.
monitor may show subtle signs of a developing problem.
In either case,the doctor or midwife may recommend that During a contraction,the flow of oxygen (from the
the external belt be replaced with an internal monitor. mother) through the placenta (to the baby) is temporarily
stopped. It is as if the baby has to hold its breath during
The internal monitor is an electronic wire that rests
each contraction. Both the placenta and the baby are
directly on the baby’s head. The provider can place it on
designed to withstand this condition. Between contrac-
the baby’s head during an internal exam. The internal
tions, the baby should be receiving more than enough
monitor can only be used when the cervix is already
oxygen to do well during the contraction.
open. This device provides a more accurate record of the
baby’s heart rate. The first sign that a baby is not getting enough oxy-
gen between contractions is often a drop in the baby’s
heart rate after the contraction (late deceleration). The
Preparation
baby’s heart rate recovers to a normal level between con-
There are no special preparations needed for fetal tractions,only to drop again after the next contraction.
monitoring. This is also a more subtle sign of distress.
1162 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gnirotinom
latef
cinortcelE
These babies will do fine if they are delivered in a noninvasive tests because electrodes are placed directly
short period of time. Sometimes, these signs develop on heart tissue. This allows the electrophysiologist to
long before delivery is expected. In that case,a C-section determine the specific location of an arrhythmia and,
may be necessary. oftentimes, correct it during the same procedure. This
corrective treatment is permanent and considered a cure,
and,in many cases,the patient may not need to take heart
Resources
medications.
PERIODICALS
EP studies may be helpful in assessing:
Sweha,Amir,et al. “Interpretation of the Electronic Fetal Heart
Rate During Labor”American Family Physician(May 1, •certain tachycardias or bradycardias of unknown
1999). cause.
Kripke,Clarissa C. “Why Are We Using Electronic Fetal Mon-
•patients who have been resuscitated after experiencing itoring?”American Family Physician(May 1,1999).
sudden cardiac death.
Deanna M. Swartout-Corbeil,R.N. •various symptoms of unknown cause, such as chest
pain,shortness of breath,fatigue,or syncope (dizzi-
ness/fainting).
•response to anti-arrhythmic therapy.
Electrophysiology study of
Precautions
the heart
Pregnant patients should not undergo an EP study
Definition because of exposure to radiation during the study,which
may be harmful to the growing baby.
An electrophysiology (EP) study of the heart is a
nonsurgical analysis of the electrical conduction system Patients who have coronary artery disease may
(normal or abnormal) of the heart. The test employs car- need to have that treated before having an EP study.
diac catheters and sophisticated computers to generate
electrocardiogram (EKG) tracings and electrical mea-
Description
surements with exquisite precision from within the heart
chambers. The rhythmic pumping action of the heart,which is
essentially a muscle,is the result of electrical impulses
The EP study can be performed solely for diagnostic
traveling throughout the walls of the four heart cham-
purposes. It also is performed to pinpoint the exact loca-
bers. These impulses originate in the sinoatrial (SA)
tion of electrical signals (cardiac mapping) in conjunction
node,which are specialized cells situated in the top right
with a therapeutic procedure called catheter ablation.
chamber of the heart:the right atrium. Normally,the SA
The test is simple,not painful,and performed in a node,acting like a spark plug,spontaneously generates
special laboratory under controlled clinical circum- the impulses, which travel through specific pathways
stances by cardiologists and nurses who subspecialize in throughout the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node.
electrophysiology. The AV node is a relay station,sending the impulses to
more specialized muscle fibers throughout the bottom
Purpose chambers of the heart:the ventricles. If these pathways
become damaged or blocked or if extra (abnormal) path-
A cardiologist may recommend an EP study when
ways exist,the heart’s rhythm may be altered (perhaps
the standard EKG,Holter monitor,event recorder,stress
too slow, too fast, or irregular), which can seriously
test, echocardiogram, or angiogram cannot provide
affect the heart’s pumping ability.
enough information to evaluate an abnormal heart
The patient is transported to the x-ray table in the EP
rhythm,called an arrhythmia.
lab and connected to various monitors. Sterile sheets are
An EP study also may be beneficial in diagnosing a
placed over him or her. A minimum of two catheters are
suspected arrhythmia in a patient who shows symptoms
inserted into the right femoral (thigh) vein in the groin
of an arrhythmia but in whom it could not be detected
area. Depending on the type of arrhythmia,the number
from other tests.
of catheters used in an EP test and their route to the heart
The purpose and great value of an EP study is that it may vary. For certain tachycardias,two more catheters
offers more detailed information to the doctor about the may be inserted in the left groin and one in the internal
electrical activity in the heart than the aforementioned jugular (neck) vein or in the subclavian (below the clavi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1163
Electrophysiology
study
of
the
heart
cle) vein. The catheters are about 0.08 in (2 mm) in (sometimes in combination with various heart drugs) the
diameter, about the size of a spaghetti noodle. The arrhythmia that the patient has previously experienced so
catheters used in catheter ablation are slightly larger. the team can observe it in a controlled environment,
compare it to the patient’s clinical or spontaneous
With the help of fluoroscopy (x rays on a television
arrhythmia,and decide how to treat it.
screen), all the catheters are guided to several specific
Once the arrhythmia is induced and the team deter-
locations in the heart. Typically,four to 10 electrodes are
mines it can be treated with catheter ablation, cardiac
located on the end of the catheters,which have the ability
mapping is performed to locate precisely the origin and
to send electrical signals to stimulate the heart (called
route of the abnormal pathway. When this is accom-
pacing) and to receive electrical signals from the heart—
plished, the ablating electrode catheter is positioned
but not at the same time (just as a walkie-talkie cannot
directly against the abnormal pathway,and high radio-
send and receive messages at the same time).
frequency energy is delivered through the electrode to
First,the electrodes are positioned to receive signals destroy (burn) the tissue in this area.
from inside the heart chambers. This allows the doctor to
measure how fast the electrical impulses travel currently
Preparation
in the patient’s heart. These measurements are called the
patient’s baseline measurements. Next,the electrodes are The following preparations are made for an EP
positioned to pace:The EP team actually tries to induce study:
1164 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
traeh
eht
fo
yduts
ygoloisyhportcelE
An electrophysiologist nurse monitors a patient’s heart rhythm during an electrophysiology study for tachycardia.(Photo-
graph by Collette Placek.Reproduced by permission.)
•the patient may be advised to stop taking certain med-
ications,especially heart drugs,that may interfere with KEY TERMS
the test results.
•blood tests usually are ordered the week before the test. Ablation—Remove or destroy, such as by burning
or cutting.
•the patient undergoes conscious sedation(awake but
relaxed) during the test. This is accomplished quite Angiogram—X ray of a blood vessel after special
often with the anesthetic drugs VersedR (Roche labora- x-ray dye has been injected into it.
tories) and fentanyl. Bradycardia—Slow heartbeat.
•a local anesthetic is injected at the site of catheter inser- Cardiac catheter—Long, thin, flexible tube, that is
tion. threaded into the heart through a blood vessel.
Cardiologist—Doctor who specializes in diagnos-
Aftercare ing and treating heart diseases.
The patient needs to rest flat in bed for several hours Echocardiogram—Ultrasound image of the heart.
after the procedure to allow healing at the catheter inser-
Electrocardiogram—Tracing of the electrical
tion sites.
activity of the heart.
The patient often returns home either the same day
Electrode—Medium for conducting an electrical
of the test or the next day. Someone should drive him or
current—in this case, platinum wires.
her home.
Electrophysiology—Study of how electrical signals
The doctor may prescribe drugs and/or insert an
in the body relate to physiologic function.
AFCD to treat the arrhythmia and may do a possible fol-
Event recorder—A small machine, worn by a
low-up EP study.
patient usually for several days or weeks, that is
activated by the patient to record his or her EKG
Risks
when a symptom is detected.
The EP diagnostic study and catheter ablation are low- Fibrillation—Rapid, random contraction (quivering).
risk procedures. There is a small risk of bleeding and/or
Holter monitor—A small machine, worn by a
infection at the site of catheter insertion,but this occurs less
patient usually for 24 hours, that continuously
than 1% of the time. Blood clot formation occurs only two
records the patient’s EKG during usual daily activity.
in 1,000 instances and is minimized with blood thinner
medications administered during the procedure. Vascular Stress test—Recording a patient’s EKG during
injuries causing hemorrhage or thrombophlebitisare pos- exercise.
sible but occur less than 0.7% of the time. Cardiac perfora- Supraventricular tachycardia—A fast heart beat
tions occur only in one or two per 1,000 instances. If the that originates above the ventricles.
right internal jugular vein is accessed,the small possibility
Tachycardia—Fast heartbeat.
of puncturing the lung with the catheter exists,which,at
worst,could cause a collapsed lung. Vascular—Pertaining to blood vessels.
Because ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation
(lethal arrhythmias) may be induced in the patient,the
EP lab personnel must be prepared to defibrillate the
•accessory (extra) pathways
patient as necessary.
•bradycardias
Normal results
The heart initiates and conducts electrical impulses Resources
normally. BOOKS
Grubb,Blair P.,and Brian Olshansky. Syncope:Mechanisms
and Management.Armonk,NY:Futura Publishing,1997.
Abnormal results
Horovitz,Emmanuel. Heartbeat:A Complete Guide to Under-
Confirmation of arrhythmias,such as: standing and Preventing Heart Disease.Los Angeles:
Health Trend Publishing,1988.
•supraventricular tachycardias
Singer,Igor. Interventional Electrophysiology.Baltimore:
•ventricular arrhythmias Williams & Wilkins,1997.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1165
Electrophysiology
study
of
the
heart
ORGANIZATIONS arms,legs,and genitals. It is estimated that 120 million
Cardiac Arrhythmia Research and Education Foundation people in the world have lymphatic filariasis,as of 1997.
(C.A.R.E.). 2082 Michelson Dr. #301 Irvine,CA 92612 The disease appears to be spreading,in spite of decades
(800)-404-9500. <http://www.longqt.com>. of research in this area.
Medtronics Manufacturer of Therapeutic Devices. 710
Other terms for elephantiasis are Barbados leg,ele-
Medtronic Parkway NE,Minneapolis,MN 55432-5604.
(800) 328-2518. <http://www.medtronic.com>. phant leg, morbus herculeus, mal de Cayenne, and
Midwest Heart Specialists. Physician Office Building,3825 myelolymphangioma.
Highland Ave.,Tower 2,Ste. 400,Downers Grove,IL
Other situations that can lead to elephantiasis are:
60515. (630) 719-4799. <http://www.midwestheart.com>.
United States Catheter Instruments (USCI). 129 Concord Road •a protozoan disease called leishmaniasis
Billerica,MA 01821. (800) 826-2273. •a repeated streptococcal infection
•the surgical removal of lymph nodes (usually to prevent
Collette L. Placek
the spread of cancer)
Electroshock therapy see Electroconvulsive •a hereditary birth defect
therapy
Causes and symptoms
Three kinds of round worms cause elephantiasis filar-
iasis: Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and Brugia
timori. Of these three,W. bancroftimakes up about 90% of
Elephantiasis
the cases. Man is the only known host of W. bancrofti.
Definition Culex,Aedes,and Anophelesmosquitoes are the car-
riers of W. bancrofti. Anophelesand Mansoniamosqui-
The word elephantiasis is a vivid and accurate term
toes are the carriers of B. malayi. In addition,Anopheles
for the syndrome it describes:the gross (visible) enlarge-
mosquitoes are the carriers of B. timori.
ment of the arms,legs,or genitals to elephantoid size.
Infected female mosquitoes take a blood meal from
a human,and,in doing so,introduce larval forms of the
Description
particular parasite they carry to the person. These larvae
True elephantiasis is the result of a parasitic infec- migrate toward a lymphatic channel,then travel to vari-
tion caused by three specific kinds of round worms. The ous places within the lymphatic system,usually position-
long,threadlike worms block the body’s lymphatic sys- ing themselves in or near lymph nodes throughout the
tem—a network of channels,lymph nodes,and organs body. During this time,they mature into more developed
that helps maintain proper fluid levels in the body by larvae and eventually into adult worms. Depending upon
draining lymph from tissues into the bloodstream. This the species of round worm,this development can take a
blockage causes fluids to collect in the tissues,which can few months or more than a year. The adult worms grow
lead to great swelling,called “lymphedema.”Limbs can to about 1 in (2.5 cm) to 4 in (10 cm) long.
swell so enormously that they resemble an elephant’s
The adult worms can live from about three to eight
foreleg in size,texture,and color. This is the severely dis-
years. Some have been known to live to 20 years,and in
figuring and disabling condition of elephantiasis.
one case 40 years. The adult worms begin reproducing
There are a few different causes of elephantiasis,but numerous live embryos,called microfilariae. The micro-
the agents responsible for most of the elephantiasis in the filariae travel to the bloodstream, where they can be
world are filarial worms: white, slender round worms ingested by a mosquito when it takes a blood meal from
found in most tropical and subtropical places. They are the infected person. If they are not ingested by a mosqui-
transmitted by particular kinds (species) of mosquitoes, to,the microfilariae die within about 12 months. If they
that is,bloodsucking insects. Infection with these worms are ingested by a mosquito, they continue to mature.
is called “lymphatic filariasis”and over a long period of They are totally dependent on their specific species of
time can cause elephantiasis. mosquito to develop further. The cycle continues when
the mosquito takes another blood meal.
Lymphatic filariasisis a disease of underdeveloped
regions found in South America,Central Africa,Asia,the Most of the symptoms an infected person experi-
Pacific Islands,and the Caribbean. It is a disease that has ences are due to the blockage of the lymphatic system by
been present for centuries,as ancient Persian and Indian the adult worms and due to the substances (excretions
writings clearly described elephant-like swellings of the and secretions) produced by the worms.
1166 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisaitnahpelE
The body’s allergic reactions may include repeated
episodes of fever, shaking chills, sweating, headaches,
vomiting,and pain. Enlarged lymph nodes,swelling of
the affected area,skin ulcers,bone and joint pain,tired-
ness,and red streaks along the arm or leg also may occur.
Abscesses can form in lymph nodes or in the lymphatic
vessels. They may appear at the surface of the skin as well.
Long-term infection with lymphatic filariasis can
lead to lymphedema,hydrocele (a buildup of fluid in any
saclike cavity or duct) in the scrotum,and elephantiasis of
the legs,scrotum,arms,penis,breasts,and vulvae. The
most common site of elephantiasis is the leg. It typically
begins in the ankle and progresses to the foot and leg. At
first the swollen leg may feel soft to the touch but eventu-
ally becomes hard and thick. The skin may appear dark-
ened or warty and may even crack,allowing bacteria to
infect the leg and complicate the disease. The microfilari-
ae usually don’t cause injury. In some instances, they
cause “eosinophilia,”an increased number of eosinophils
(a type of white blood cells) in the blood.
This disease is more intense in people who never
have been exposed to lymphatic filariasis than it is in the
native people of tropical areas where the disease occurs.
This is because many of the native people often are
immunologically tolerant.
Diagnosis
The only sure way to diagnose lymphatic filariasis is
by detecting the parasite itself,either the adult worms or
the microfilariae.
Microscopic examination of the person’s blood may
reveal microfilariae. But many times,people who have
Treatment
been infected for a long time do not have microfilariae in
their bloodstream. The absence of them,therefore,does The drug of choice in treating lymphatic filariasis is
not mean necessarily that the person is not infected. In diethylcarbamazine (DEC). The trade name in the United
these cases, examining the urine or hydrocele fluid or States is Hetrazan.
performing other clinical tests is necessary.
The treatment schedule is typically 2 mg/kg per day,
Collecting blood from the individual for microscopic three times a day,for three weeks. The drug is taken in
examination should be done during the night when the tablet form.
microfilariae are more numerous in the bloodstream.
(Interestingly,this is when mosquitoes bite most frequent- DEC kills the microfilariae quickly and injures or
ly.) During the day microfilariae migrate to deeper blood kills the adult worms slowly, if at all. If all the adult
vessels in the body,especially in the lung. If it is decided worms are not killed, remaining paired males and
to perform the blood test during the day,the infected indi- females may continue to produce more larvae. There-
vidual may be given a “provocative”dose of medication fore, several courses of DEC treatment over a long
to provoke the microfilariae to enter the bloodstream. time period may be necessary to rid the individual of
Blood then can be collected an hour later for examination. the parasites.
Detecting the adult worms can be difficult because DEC has been shown to reduce the size of enlarged
they are deep within the lymphatic system and difficult to lymph nodes and,when taken long-term,to reduce ele-
get to. Biopsies usually are not performed because they phantiasis. In India,DEC has been given in the form of a
usually don’t reveal much information. medicated salt,which helps prevent spread of the disease.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1167
Elephantiasis
Man suffering from elephantiasis.(Photograph by C.James
Webb, Phototake NYC.Reproduced by permission.)
microfilariae, but the effects of this drug on the adult
KEY TERMS worms are still being investigated. It is probable that
patients will need to continue using DEC to kill the adult
Antigen—Any substance (usually a protein) that worms. Mild side effects of Ivermectin include headache,
causes an immune response by the body to pro- fever,and myalgia.
duce antibodies. Other means of managing lymphatic filariasis are
Filarial—Threadlike. The word “filament” is pressure bandages to wrap the swollen limb and elastic
formed from the same root word. stockings to help reduce the pressure. Exercising and ele-
vating a bandaged limb also can help reduce its size.
Host—A person or animal in which a parasite
lives, is nourished, grows, and reproduces. Surgery can be performed to reduce elephantiasis by
removing excess fatty and fibrous tissue, draining the
Lymph—A watery substance that collects in the
swelled area,and removing the dead worms.
tissues and organs of the body and eventually
drains into the bloodstream.
Prognosis
Lymphatic system—A network composed of ves-
sels, lymph nodes, the tonsils, the thymus gland, With DEC treatment,the prognosis is good for early
and the spleen. It is responsible for transporting and mild cases of lymphatic filariasis. The prognosis is
fluid and nutrients to the bloodstream and for poor,however,for heavy parasitic infestations.
maturing certain blood cells that are part of the
body’s immune system.
Prevention
Lymphedema—The unnatural accumulation of
The two main ways to control this disease are to take
lymph in the tissues of the body, which results in
DEC preventively,which has shown to be effective,and
swelling in that area.
to reduce the number of carrier insects in a particular area.
Protozoa—(Plural form of protozoan) Single-
Avoiding mosquito bites with insecticides and insect
celled organisms (not bacteria) of which about 30
repellents is helpful, as is wearing protective clothing
kinds cause disease in humans.
and using bed netting.
Streptococcal—Pertaining to any of the Strepto-
Much effort has been made in cleaning the breeding
coccusbacteria. These organisms can cause pneu-
sites (stagnant water) of mosquitoes near people’s homes
monia, skin infections, and many other diseases.
in areas where filariasis is found.
Before visiting countries where lymphatic filariasis
is found,it would be wise to consult a travel physician to
learn about current preventative measures.
The side effects of DEC almost all are due to the
body’s natural allergic reactions to the dying parasites
Resources
rather than to the DEC itself. For this reason,DEC must
be given carefully to reduce the danger to the individual. BOOKS
Side effects may include fever,chills,headache,dizzi- Ash,Laurence R. Atlas of Human Parasitology.4th ed. Chica-
ness, nausea and vomiting, itching, and joint pain. go:ASCP Press,1997.
These side effects usually occur within the first few days Conn’s Current Therapy,1996.Ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadel-
of treatment. These side effects usually subside as the phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed.
individual continues taking the drug.
Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,
There is an alternate treatment plan for the use of 1995.
DEC. This plan is designed to kill the parasites slowly (to Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
reduce allergic reactions to the dead microfilariae and Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Weatherall,D. J. Oxford Textbook of Medicine.3rd ed. Oxford,
dying adult worms within the body). Lower doses of DEC
England:Oxford University Press,1996.
are taken for the first few days, followed by the higher
Zatouroff,Michael. Diagnosis in Color:Physical Signs in
dose of 2 mg/kg per day for the remaining three weeks. In
General Medicine.2nd ed. London:Mosby-Wolfe,1996.
addition,steroids may be prescribed to prevent the indi-
vidual’s body from reacting severely to the dead worms. PERIODICALS
Bandyopadhyay,Lalita. “Lymphatic Filariasis and the Women
Another drug used is Ivermectin. Early research of India.”Social Science and Medicine42,no.10 (May
studies of Ivermectin show that it is excellent in killing 1996):1401-1410.
1168 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisaitnahpelE
Eberhard,Mark L. “A Survey of Knowledge,Attitudes,and bral embolism) causes stroke, which can be fatal. An
Perceptions (KAPs) of Lymphatic Filariasis,Elephantia- estimated 5–14% of all strokes are caused by cerebral
sis,and Hydrocele Among Residents in an Endemic Area emboli. Arterial emboli to the extremities can lead to tis-
in Haiti.”American Journal of Tropical Medicine and sue death and amputation of the affected limb if not
Hygiene54,no. 3 (Mar. 1996):299-303.
treated effectively within hours. Intestines and kidneys
Rajan,T. V. “Immunopathogenetic Aspects of Disease Induced
can also suffer damage from emboli.
by Helminth Parasites.”Chemical Immunology66 (1997):
125-158.
Gas embolism
ORGANIZATIONS
National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases,Divi- Gas emboli result from the compression of respira-
sion of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. Building
tory gases into the blood and other tissues due to rapid
31,Room. 7A-50,31 Center Drive MSC 2520,Bethesda,
changes in environmental pressure,for example,while
MD 20892. <http://www.niaid.nih.gov>.
flying or scuba diving. As external pressure decreases,
National Lymphedema Network (NLN). 2211 Post St.,Suite
gases (like nitrogen) that are dissolved in the blood and
404,San Francisco,CA 94115. (800) 541-3259. <http://
other tissues become small bubbles that can block blood
www.hooked.net>.
National Organization for Rare Disorders. PO Box 8923,New flow and cause organ damage.
Fairfield,CT 06812-8923. (800) 999-6673. <http://www.
rarediseases.org>.
Pulmonary embolism
Collette L. Placek In a pulmonary embolism,a common illness,blood
flow is blocked at a pulmonary artery. When emboli block
Enzyme-linked Immunosorbant (ELISA) see the main pulmonary artery,and in cases where there are
AIDS tests no initial symptoms,a pulmonary embolism can quickly
become fatal. According to the American Heart Associa-
tion,an estimated 600,000 Americans develop pulmonary
emboli annually and 60,000 die from it.
A pulmonary embolism is difficult to diagnose. Less
Embolism than 10% of patients who die from a pulmonary
embolism were diagnosed with the condition. More than
Definition 90% of cases of pulmonary emboli are complications of
deep vein thrombosis, blood clots in the deep vein of
An embolism is an obstruction in a blood vessel due
the leg or pelvis.
to a blood clot or other foreign matter that gets stuck
while traveling through the bloodstream. The plural of
embolism is emboli.
Causes and symptoms
Arterial emboli are usually a complication of heart
Description
disease where blood clots form in the heart’s chambers.
Emboli have moved from the place where they were Gas emboli are caused by rapid changes in environmen-
formed through the bloodstream to another part of the tal pressure that could happen when flying or scuba div-
body,where they obstruct an artery and block the flow of ing. A pulmonary embolism is caused by blood clots that
blood. The emboli are usually formed from blood clots travel through the blood stream to the lungs and block a
but are occasionally comprised of air,fat,or tumor tis- pulmonary artery. More than 90% of the cases of pul-
sue. Embolic events can be multiple and small,or single monary embolism are a complication of deep vein
and massive. They can be life-threatening and require thrombosis,which typically occurs in patients who have
immediate emergency medical care. There are three gen- had orthopedic surgery and patients with cancer or
eral categories of emboli:arterial,gas,and pulmonary. other chronic illnesses like congestive heart failure.
Pulmonary emboli are the most common.
Risk factors for arterial and pulmonary emboli
include:prolonged bed rest,surgery,childbirth,heart
Arterial embolism
attack,stroke,congestive heart failure,cancer,obesity,a
In arterial emboli,blood flow is blocked at the junc- broken hip or leg,oral contraceptives,sickle cell ane-
tion of major arteries,most often at the groin,knee,or mia,chest trauma,certain congenital heart defects,and
thigh. Arterial emboli are generally a complication of old age. Risk factors for gas emboli include:scuba div-
heart disease. An arterial embolismin the brain (cere- ing,amateur plane flight,exercise,injury,obesity,dehy-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1169
Embolism
arterial blood gas measurements, and venography or
venous ultrasound could be ordered.
Diagnosing an arterial embolism
Ultrasound uses sound waves to create an image of
the heart,organs,or arteries. The technician applies gel
to a hand-held transducer then presses it against the
patient’s body. The ultrasound’s sound waves arteries are
converted into an image that can be displayed on a moni-
tor. Performed in an outpatient diagnostic laboratory,the
test takes 30–60 minutes.
An arteriogram is an x ray in which a contrast medi-
um is injected to make the arteries visible on the x ray. It
can be performed in a radiology unit,outpatient clinic,or
diagnostic center of a hospital.
dration,excessive alcohol,colds,and medications such Diagnosing a pulmonary embolism
as narcotics and antihistamines.
A chest x ray can show fluid build-up and detect
Common symptoms of a pulmonary embolism
other respiratory diseases. The perfusion lung scan shows
include:
poor flow of blood in areas beyond blocked arteries. The
•labored breathing, sometimes accompanied by chest patient inhales a small amount of radiopharmaceutical
pain and pictures of airflow into the lungs are taken with a
gamma camera. Then a different radiopharmaceutical is
•a rapid pulse
injected into an arm vein and lung blood flow is scanned.
•a coughthat may produce sputum
A normal result essentially rules out a pulmonary
•a low-grade fever embolism. A lung scan can be performed in a hospital or
•fluid build-up in the lungs an outpatient facility and takes about 45 minutes.
Less common symptoms include: Pulmonary angiography is the most reliable test for
diagnosing a pulmonary embolism but it is not used often
•coughing up blood
because it is expensive,invasive,and not readily available
•pain caused by movement or breathing in most hospitals. Pulmonary angiography is a radiographic
•leg swelling test which involves injection of a radio contrast agent to
show the pulmonary arteries. A cinematic camera records
•bluish skin
the blood flow through the patient,who lies on a table. Pul-
•fainting monary angiography is usually performed in a hospital’s
•swollen neck veins radiology medicine department and takes 30–60 minutes.
Symptoms of an arterial embolism include: An electrocardiograph shows the heart’s electrical
activity and helps distinguish a pulmonary embolism
•severe pain in the area of the embolism
from a heart attack. Electrodes covered with conducting
•pale,bluish cool skin jelly are placed on the patient’s chest, arms, and legs.
•numbness Impulses of the heart’s activity are traced on paper. The
test takes about 10 minutes.
•tingling
Arterial blood gas measurements are sometimes
•muscular weakness or paralysis
helpful but,alone,they are not diagnostic for pulmonary
embolism. Blood is taken from an artery instead of a
Diagnosis vein,usually in the wrist.
An embolism can be diagnosed through the patient’s Venography is used to look for the most likely
history,a physical exam,and diagnostic tests. For arterial source of a pulmonary embolism,deep vein thrombosis.
emboli, cardiac ultrasound and/or arteriography are It is very accurate,but it is not used often,because it is
ordered. For a pulmonary embolism,a chest x ray,lung painful, expensive, exposes the patient to a fairly high
scan, pulmonary angiography, electrocardiography, dose of radiation,and can cause complications. Venogra-
1170 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
msilobmE
A close up view of a pulmonary embolism.(Custom Medical
Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
phy identifies the location,extent,and degree of attach-
ment of the blood clots and enables the condition of the KEY TERMS
deep leg veins to be assessed. A contrast solution is
injected into a foot vein through a catheter. The physician Anticoagulants—Drugs that suppress, delay, or
observes the movement of the solution through the vein prevent blood clots. Anticoagulants are used to
with a fluoroscope while a series of x rays are taken. treat embolisms.
Venography takes between 30–45 minutes and can be
Artery—A blood vessel that carries blood from the
done in a physician’s office,a laboratory,or a hospital.
heart to other body tissues. Embolisms obstruct
Radionuclide venography,in which a radioactive isotope
arteries.
is injected,is occasionally used,especially if a patient
has had reactions to contrast solutions. Venous ultra- Deep vein thrombosis—A blood clot in the calf’s
sound is the preferred evaluation of leg veins. deep vein. This frequently leads to pulmonary
embolism if untreated.
Treatment Emboli—Clots or other substances that travel
through the blood stream and get stuck in an
Patients with emboli require immediate hospitaliza-
artery, blocking circulation.
tion. They are generally treated with clot-dissolving
and/or clot-preventing drugs. Thrombolytic therapyto Thrombolytics—Drugs that dissolve blood clots.
dissolve blood clots is the definitive treatment for a very Thrombolytics are used to treat embolisms.
severe pulmonary embolism. Streptokinase,urokinase,
and recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) are
used. Heparin is the anticoagulant drug of choice for pre-
venting formation of blood clots. Warfarin,an oral anti- graduated compression stockings and low-dose heparin is
coagulant,is sometimes used concurrently and is usually significantly more effective than low-dose heparin alone.
continued after the hospitalization. Gradient elastic stockings,also called anti-embolism
stockings,decrease the risk of blood clots by compress-
In the case of an arterial embolism,the affected limb
ing superficial leg veins and forcing blood into the deep
is placed in a dependent position and kept warm.
veins. They can be knee-,thigh-,or waist-length. Many
Embolectomy is the treatment of choice in the majority
physicians order the use of stockings before surgery and
of early cases of arterial emboli in the extremities. In this
until there is no longer an elevated risk of developing
procedure,a balloon-tipped catheter is inserted into the
blood clots. The risk of deep vein thrombosis after
artery to remove thromboembolic matter.
surgery is reduced 50% with the use of these stockings.
With a pulmonary embolism, oxygen therapy is
The American Heart Association recommends that the
often used to maintain normal oxygen concentrations.
use of graduated compression stockings be considered
For people who can’t take anticoagulants and in some
for all high-risk surgical patients.
other cases,surgery may be needed to insert a device that
Intermittent pneumatic compression involves wrap-
filters blood returning to the heart and lungs.
ping knee- or thigh-high cuffs around the legs to prevent
blood clots. The cuffs are connected to a pump which
Prognosis inflates and deflates,mimicking the heart’s normal pump-
ing action and reducing the pooling of blood. Intermittent
Of patients hospitalized with an arterial embolism,
pneumatic compression can be used during surgery and
25–30% die,and 5–25% require amputation of a limb.
recovery and continues until there is no longer an elevated
About 10% of patients with a pulmonary embolism die
risk of developing blood clots. The American Heart Asso-
suddenly within the first hour of onset of the condition.
ciation recommends the use of intermittent pneumatic
The outcome for all other patients is generally good; only
compression for patients who cannot take anticoagulants,
3% of patients die who are properly diagnosed early and
for example,spinal cord and brain trauma patients.
treated. In cases of an undiagnosed pulmonary
embolism,about 30% of patients die.
Resources
Prevention BOOKS
“Arterial Occlusive Disease.”In Professional Guide to Diseases.
Embolism can be prevented in high risk patients
5th ed. Springhouse,PA:Springhouse Corporation,1995.
through antithrombotic drugs such as heparin, venous
DeBakey,M. E.,and A. M. Gotto. “Invasive Diagnostic Proce-
interruption,gradient elastic stockings,and intermittent dures.”In The New Living Heart.Holbrook,MA:Adams
pneumatic compression of the legs. The combination of Media Corporation,1997.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1171
Embolism
“Disorders of the Pulmonary Circulation,”“Arterial 1.8 million Americans with the disease,which ranks fif-
Embolism,”and “Other Disorders Due to Physical teenth among chronic conditions that cause limitations of
Agents.”In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, activity. The disease is usually caused by smoking,but a
1996.35th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford: small number of cases are caused by an inherited defect.
Appleton & Lange,1995.
Noble,John,ed. “Arterial Emboli and Acute Thrombosis.”In Normally functioning lungs are elastic,efficiently
Textbook of Primary Care Medicine.2nd ed. St. Louis: expanding and recoiling as air passes freely through the
Mosby,1996. bronchus to the alveoli,where oxygen is moved into the
Texas Heart Institute. “Diseases of the Peripheral Arteries and blood and carbon dioxide is filtered out. When a person
Veins.”In Texas Heart Institute’s Heart Owner’s Hand- inhales cigarette smoke or certain other irritants,his or
book.New York:John Wiley & Sons,1996. her immune system responds by releasing substances
that are meant to defend the lungs against the smoke.
PERIODICALS
ACCP Consensus Committee on Pulmonary Embolism. “Opin- These substances can also attack the cells of the lungs,
ions Regarding the Diagnosis of Venous Thromboembolic but the body normally inhibits such action with the
Disease.”Chest113,no. 2 (Feb. 1998):499-503. release of other substances. In smokers and those with
Charland,Scott L.,and Dawn Klinter. “Low-Molecular Weight the inherited defect,however,no such prevention occurs
Heraprins in the Treatment of Pulmonary Embolism.”The and the lung tissue is damaged in such a way that it loses
Annals of Pharmacotherapy32 (Feb. 1998):258-263. its elasticity. The small passageways (bronchioles) lead-
Tapson,Victor F. “Pulmonary Embolism-New Diagnostic
ing to the alveoli collapse,trapping air within the alveoli.
Approaches.”The New England Journal of Medicine336,
The alveoli,unable to recoil efficiently and move the air
no. 20 (15 May 1997):1449-1451.
out,over expand and rupture. As the disease progresses,
ORGANIZATIONS coughing and shortness of breath occur. In the later
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX stages, the lungs cannot supply enough oxygen to the
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>. blood. Emphysema often occurs with other respiratory
diseases,particularly chronic bronchitis. These two dis-
OTHER
“Management of Deep Vein Thrombosis and Pulmonary eases are often referred to as one disorder called chronic
Embolism.”and “Stroke (Brain Attack).”American Heart obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Association.3 Mar. 1998 <http://www.americanheart.org>.
Emphysema is most common among people aged 50
“Warfin and Compression Treatment Prevents Coagulation in
and older. Those with inherited emphysema may experience
Knee ReplacementsAmerican.”Academy of Orthopaedic
the onset as early as their thirties or fourties Men are more
Surgeons Online.15 Feb. 1997. 22 Apr. 1998 <http://
likely than women to develop emphysema,but female cases
www.aaos.org>.
are increasing as the number of female smokers rises.
Lori De Milto
Causes and symptoms
EMG see Electromyography
Heavy cigarette smoking causes about 80–90% of
Emollient bath see Therapeutic baths
all emphysema cases. However a few cases are the result
of an inherited deficiency of a substance called alpha-1-
antitrypsin (AAT). The number of Americans with this
deficiency is relatively small,probably no greater than
70,000. Pipe, cigar, and marijuana smoking can also
Emphysema damage the lungs. While a person may be less likely to
inhale cigar and pipe smoke,these types of smoke can
Definition also impair lung function. Marijuana smoke may be even
more damaging because it is inhaled deeply and held in
Emphysema is a chronic respiratory disease where
by the smoker.
there is over-inflation of the air sacs (alveoli) in the
lungs, causing a decrease in lung function, and often, The symptoms of emphysema develop gradually
breathlessness. over many years. It is a common occurrence for many
emphysema patients to have lost over half of their func-
tioning lung tissue before they become aware that some-
Description
thing is wrong. Shortness of breath,a chronic mild cough
Emphysema is the most common cause of death (which may be productive of large amounts of dark,thick
from respiratory disease in the United States,and is the sputum,and often dismissed as “smoker’s cough”),and
fourth most common cause of death overall. There are sometimes weight loss are associated with emphysema.
1172 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
amesyhpmE
Initially, a patient may only notice shortness of breath
when he or she is exercising. However,as the disease pro-
gresses,it will occur with less exertion or no exertion at
all. Emphysema patients may also develop an enlarged,or
“barrel,”chest. Other symptoms may be skipped breaths,
difficulty sleeping,morning headaches,increased diffi-
culty breathing while lying down,chronic fatigue,and
swelling of the feet,ankles,or legs. Those with emphyse-
ma are at risk for a variety of other complications result-
ing from weakened lung function,including pneumonia.
Diagnosis
A variety of pulmonary function tests may be
ordered. In the early stages of emphysema, the only
result may be dysfunction of the small airways. Patients
with emphysema may show an increase in the total
amount of air that is in the lungs (total lung capacity),but
a decrease in the amount of air that can be breathed out
after taking a deep breath (vital capacity). With severe
emphysema,vital capacity is substantially below normal.
Spirometry,a procedure that measures air flow and lung
volume,helps in the diagnosis of emphysema.
A chest x rayis often ordered to aid in the diagnosis
of emphysema,though patients in the early stages of the
treatments,only oxygen therapy has shown an increase
disease may have normal findings. Abnormal findings on
in the survival rate.
the chest x ray include over-inflation of the lungs and an
abnormally increased chest diameter. The diaphragm may Home oxygen therapy may improve the survival
appear depressed or flattened. In addition,patients with times in those patients with advanced emphysema who
advanced emphysema may show a smaller or vertical also have low blood oxygen levels. It may improve the
heart. The physician may observe blisters in the lungs and patient’s tolerance of exercise,as well as improve their
bulging of the accessory muscles of the respiratory sys- performance in certain aspects of brain function and
tem. Late in the disease,an EKG will show signs of right muscle coordination. The functioning of the heart may
ventricular failure in the heart and increased hemoglobin also improve with an increased concentration of oxygen
due to lower levels of oxygen in the patient’s blood. in the blood. Oxygen may also decrease insomniaand
headaches. Some patients may only receive oxygen at
Treatment night,but studies have illustrated that it is most effective
when administered at least 18,but preferably 24 hours
Treatment methods for emphysema do not cure or
per day. Portable oxygen tanks prescribed to patients
reverse the damage to the lungs. However,they may slow
carry a limited supply and must be refilled on a regular
the progression of the disease, relieve symptoms, and
basis by a home health provider. Medicare and most
help control possibly fatal complications. The first step
insurance companies cover a large proportion of the cost
in treatment for smokers is to quit,so as to prevent any
of home oxygen therapy. Patients should be instructed
further deterioration of breathing ability. Smoking cessa-
regarding special safety issues involving the transport
tion programs may be effective. Consistent encourage-
and presence of oxygen in the home.
ment along with the help of health care professionals as
well as family and friends can help increase the success A variety of medications may be used in the treat-
rate of someone attempting to quit. ment of emphysema. Usually the patient responds best to
a combination of medicines,rather than one single drug.
If the patient and the health care team develop and
maintain a complete program of respiratory care,disabil- Bronchodilatorsare sometimes used to help alle-
ity can be decreased, acute episodes of illness may be viate the patient’s symptoms by relaxing and opening
prevented,and the number of hospitalizations reduced. the airways. They can be inhaled, taken by mouth, or
However,only quitting smoking has been shown to slow injected. Another category of medication often used is
down the progression of the disease,and among all other corticosteroidsor steroids. These help to decrease the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1173
Emphysema
A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of lung tissue indi-
cating emphysema.(Photograph by Hossler, Ph.D., Custom
Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
For those patients with advanced emphysema,keep-
ing the air passages reasonably clear of secretions can
prove difficult. Some common methods for mobilizing
and removing secretions include:
•Postural drainage. This helps to remove secretions from
the airways. The patient lies in a position that allows
gravity to aid in draining different parts of the lung.
This is often done after the patient inhales an aerosol
medication. The basic position involves the patient
lying on the bed with his chest and head over the side
and the forearms resting on the floor.
•Chest percussion. This technique involves lightly clap-
ping the back and chest,and may help to loosen thick
secretions.
•Coughing and deep breathing. These techniques may
aid the patient in bringing up secretions.
•Aerosol treatments. These treatments may involve solu-
tions of saline, often mixed with a bronchodilator,
which are then inhaled as an aerosol. The aerosols thin
and loosen secretions. A treatment normally takes 10 to
15 minutes,and is given three or four times a day.
Patients with COPD can learn to perform a variety
inflammation of the airway walls. They are occasional- of self-help measures that may help improve their symp-
ly used if bronchodilators are ineffective in preventing toms and their ability to participate in everyday activi-
airway obstruction. Some patients’ lung function ties. These measures include:
improves with corticosteroids,and inhaled steroids may
•Avoiding any exposure to dusts and fumes.
be beneficial to patients with few side effects. A variety
of antibioticsare frequently given at the first sign of a •Avoiding air pollution,including the cigarette smoke of
respiratory infection,such as increased amounts of spu- others.
tum, or if there has been a change in the color of the
•Avoiding other people who have infections like the cold
sputum. Expectorants can help to loosen respiratory or flu. Get a pneumonia vaccinationand a yearly flu
secretions, enabling the patient to more easily expel
shot.
them from the airways.
•Drinking plenty of fluids. This helps to loosen respira-
Many of the medications prescribed involve the use tory secretions so they can be brought up more easily
of a metered dose inhaler (MDI) that may require special through coughing.
instruction to be used correctly. MDIs are a convenient
•Avoiding extreme temperatures of heat or cold. Also
and safe method of delivering medication to the lungs.
avoiding high altitudes. (Special precautions can be
However,if they are used incorrectly the medication will
taken that may enable the emphysema patient to fly on
not get to the right place. Proper technique is essential
a plane.)
for the medication to be effective.
•Maintaining adequate nutritional intake. Normally a
For some patients, surgical treatment may be the high protein diet taken in many small feedings is rec-
best option. Lung volume reduction surgery is a surgical ommended.
procedure in which the most diseased parts of the lung
are removed to enable the remaining lung and breathing
Alternative treatment
muscles to work more efficiently. Preliminary studies
suggest improved survival rates and better functioning Many patients are interested in whether any alterna-
with the surgery. Another surgical procedure used for tive treatments for emphysema are available. Some prac-
emphysema patients is lung transplantation. Trans- titioners recommend supplements of antioxidant nutri-
plantation may involve one or both lungs. However,it is ents. There have also been some studies indicating a cor-
a risky and expensive procedure,and donor organs may relation between a low Vitamin A levels and COPD,with
not be available. suggestions that supplements of vitamin A might be ben-
1174 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
amesyhpmE
X ray showing emphysema in the lungs.(Photo Researchers.
Reproduced by permission.)
ORGANIZATIONS
KEY TERMS American Lung Association. 1740 Broadway New York,NY
10019. (212) 315-8700. <http://www.lungusa.org>.
The National Emphysema Foundation. 15 Stevens St. Norwalk,
Alveoli—Small cells or cavities. In the lungs, these
CT 06856. <http://www.emphysemafoundation.org>.
are air sacs where oxygen enters the blood and
The National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. <http://www.
carbon dioxide is filtered out.
nhlbi. nih.gov>.
Pulmonary—Related to or associated with the
lungs. Deanna Swartout-Corbeil,RN
eficial. Aromatherapists have used essential oils like
eucalyptus,lavender,pine,and rosemary to help relieve Empyema
nasal congestion and make breathing easier. The herb
elecampane may act as an expectorant to help patients Definition
clear mucus from the lungs. The patient should discuss
Empyema is a condition in which pus and fluid from
these remedies with their health care practitioner prior to
infected tissue collects in a body cavity. The name comes
trying them,as some may interact with the more tradi-
from the Greek word empyein meaning pus-producing
tional treatments that are already being used.
(suppurate). Empyema is most often used to refer to col-
lections of pus in the space around the lungs (pleural cav-
Prognosis ity), but sometimes refers to similar collections in the
gall bladder or the pelvic cavity. Empyema in the pleural
Emphysema is a serious and chronic disease that
cavity is sometimes called empyema thoracis,or empye-
cannot be reversed. If detected early, the effects and
ma of the chest, to distinguish it from empyema else-
progression can be slowed, particularly if the patient
where in the body.
stops smoking immediately. Complications of emphy-
sema include higher risks for pneumonia and acute
bronchitis. Overall, the prognosis for patients with Description
emphysema is poor, with a survival rate for all those
Empyema may have a number of causes but is most
with COPD of four years,and even less for emphyse-
frequently a complication of pneumonia. Its develop-
ma. However,individual cases vary and many patients
ment can be divided into three phases:an acute phase in
can live much longer with supplemental oxygen and
which the body cavity fills with a thin fluid containing
other treatment measures.
some pus; a second stage in which the fluid thickens and
a fibrous,coagulation protein (fibrin) begins to accumu-
Prevention late within the cavity; and a third or chronic stage in
which the lung or other organ is encased within a thick
The best way to prevent emphysema is to avoid
covering of fibrous material.
smoking. Even patients with inherited emphysema
should avoid smoking,as it especially worsens the onset
and severity. If patients quit smoking as soon as evidence Causes and symptoms
of small airway obstruction begins,they can significantly
Empyema thoracis can be caused by a number of dif-
improve their prognosis.
ferent organisms,including bacteria,fungi,and amebas,in
connection with pneumonia,chest wounds,chest surgery,
Resources
lung abscesses, or a ruptured esophagus. The infective
BOOKS organism can get into the pleural cavity either through the
Beers,Mark H.,and Robert Berkow,eds. The Merck Manual of bloodstream or other circulatory system, in secretions
Diagnosis and Therapy,17th ed.Whitehouse Station,NJ: from lung tissue,or on the surfaces of surgical instruments
Merck and Company,Inc.,1999. or objects that cause open chest wounds. The most com-
mon organisms that cause empyema are the following bac-
PERIODICALS
teria:Streptococcus pneumoniae,Haemophilus influenzae,
“Data Mounting on Merits of Lung Volume Reduction
Surgery.”Family Practice News(February 15,2001):5. and Staphylococcus aureus. S. aureusis the most common
Lewis,Laurie. “Optimal Treatment for COPD.”Patient Care cause in all age groups,accounting for 90% of cases of
(May 30,2000):60. empyema in infants and children. Pelvic empyema in
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1175
Empyema
prefer to lie on the side of the body affected by the
KEY TERMS empyema. Family members may notice bad breath. In
severe cases,the patient may become dehydrated,cough
Abscess—An area of inflamed and injured body up blood or greenish-brown sputum,run a fever as high
tissue that fills with pus. as 105°F (40.6°C),or fall into a coma.
Decortication—Surgical removal of the fibrous Patients with thoracic empyema may develop poten-
peel that covers the lungs in third-stage empyema. tially life-threatening complications if the condition is
not treated. The infected tissues may develop large col-
Empyema—The collection of pus in a body cavity,
lections of pus (abscesses) that can rupture into the
particularly the lung or pleural cavity.
patient’s airway,or the infection may spread to the tis-
Fibrin—A fibrous blood protein vital to coagula- sues surrounding the heart. In extreme cases the empye-
tion and blood clot formation. ma may spread to the brain by means of bacteria carried
Percussion—A diagnostic technique in which the in the bloodstream.
back, chest, or abdomen is tapped to determine In pelvic empyema, the infection produces large
whether body cavities contain abnormal fluid. amounts of thick, foul-smelling pus that is rapidly
Pleural cavity—The space surrounding the lungs, replaced even after drainage. Empyema of the gallblad-
including the membranes covering the lungs and der is marked by intense pain on the upper right side of
lining the inside of the chest wall. the abdomen,high fever,and rigidity of the muscles over
the infected area.
Pneumonia—Inflammation of the lungs usually
caused by a virus, bacteria, or other organism.
Diagnosis
Resection—The surgical removal of part of an
A physician may consider the possibility of empye-
organ or body structure, as in rib resection.
ma thoracis in patients with pneumonia or other symp-
Suppurate—To produce or discharge pus.
toms of lung infection. When listening to sounds within
Thoracentesis—A procedure in which fluid is the patient’s chest with a stethoscope, the sounds of
withdrawn from the pleural cavity through a nee- breathing will be partly muffled and harder to hear in the
dle inserted between the ribs. The fluid may be patients with empyema. The area of the chest over the
withdrawn either for diagnostic tests or to drain infection will sound dull when tapped or thumped (per-
the cavity. cussed). On an x ray,empyema thoracis will appear as a
cloudy or opaque area. The amount of fluid present in the
Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS)—A tech-
pleural cavity can be estimated using an ultrasound
nique used to aid in the placement of chest tubes
imaging procedure. The diagnosis of empyema,however,
or when performing decortications when treating
has to be confirmed with laboratory tests because its
advanced empyema.
symptoms can be caused by other disease conditions.
The diagnosis of empyema is usually confirmed by
analyzing a sample of fluid taken from the pleural cavity.
women is most often caused by Bacteroides strains or The sample is obtained by a procedure called thoracente-
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In elderly, chronically ill, or sis. In this procedure,the patient is given a local anesthet-
alcoholic patients,empyema is often caused by Klebsiella ic,a needle is inserted into the pleural cavity through the
pneumoniaespecies of bacteria. back between the ribs on the infected side,and a sample
When the disease organisms arrive in the cavity sur- of fluid is withdrawn. If the patient has empyema,there
rounding the lungs,they infect the tissues that cover the will be a very high level of one particular kind of immune
lungs and line the chest wall. As the body attempts to cell (white blood cells),a high level of protein,and a very
fight off the infection,the cavity fills up with tissue fluid, low level of blood sugar. The fluid can also be tested for
pus,and dead tissue cells. Empyema of the gall bladder the specific disease organism by staining or tissue cul-
or pelvis results from similar reactions to infection in tures. In some cases,the color,smell,or consistency of
those parts of the body. the tissue fluid also helps to confirm the diagnosis.
The signs and symptoms of empyema vary some-
Treatment
what according to the location of the infection and its
severity. In empyema thoracis,patients usually exhibit Empyema is treated using a combination of medica-
symptoms of pneumonia, including fever, cough, tions and surgical techniques. Treatment with medication
fatigue,shortness of breath,and chest pain. They may involves intravenously administering a two-week course
1176 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ameypmE
of antibiotics. It is important to give antibiotics as soon Enalapril see Angiotensin-converting
as possible to prevent first-stage empyema from progress-
enzyme inhibitors
ing to its later stages. The antibiotics most commonly
used are penicillin and vancomycin. Patients experiencing
difficulty breathing are also given oxygen therapy.
Surgical treatment of empyema has two goals:
drainage of the infected fluid and closing up of the space
Encephalitis
left in the pleural cavity. If the infection is still in its early
stages,the fluid can be drained by thoracentesis. In sec- Definition
ond-stage empyema,the surgeon will insert a chest tube in
the patient’s rib cage or remove part of a rib (rib resection) Encephalitis is an inflammation of the brain,usually
in order to drain the fluid. In third-stage empyema,the sur- caused by a direct viral infection or a hypersensitivity
geon may cut or peel away the thick fibrous layer coating reaction to a virus or foreign protein. Brain inflammation
the lung. This procedure is called decortication. When the caused by a bacterial infection is sometimes called
fibrous covering is removed,the lung will expand to fill cerebritis. When both the brain and spinal cord are
the space in the chest cavity. The doctor can use video- involved, the disorder is called encephalomyelitis. An
assisted thoracic surgery(VATS) techniques to position inflammation of the brain’s covering, or meninges, is
the chest tube or to perform a limited decortication. The called meningitis.
VATS technique allows a physician to see within the body
during certain surgical procedures. Empyema of the gall- Description
bladder is a serious condition that is treated with intra-
Encephalitis is an inflammation of the brain. The
venous antibiotics and surgical removal of the gallbladder.
inflammation is a reaction of the body’s immune system
to infection or invasion. During the inflammation, the
Prognosis
brain’s tissues become swollen. The combination of the
The prognosis for recovery is generally good,except infection and the immune reaction to it can cause
in those cases with complications, such as a brain headacheand a fever,as well as more severe symptoms
abscessor blood poisoning,or cases caused by certain in some cases.
types of streptococci.
Approximately 2,000 cases of encephalitis are
reported to the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta,
Resources GA each year. The viruses causing primary encephalitis
BOOKS can be epidemic or sporadic. The poliovirus is an epi-
“Bedside Procedures:Thoracentesis.”In Surgery On Call,ed. demic cause. Arthropod-borne viral encephalitis is
Leonard G. Gomella and Alan T. Lefor. Stamford:Apple- responsible for most epidemic viral encephalitis. The
ton & Lange,1996. viruses live in animal hosts and mosquitos that transmit
Chambers,Henry F. “Infectious Diseases:Bacterial & Chlamy- the disease. The most common form of non-epidemic or
dial.”In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1998. sporadic encephalitis is caused by the herpes simplex
37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton
virus, type 1 (HSV-1) and has a high rate of death.
& Lange,1997.
Mumpsis another example of a sporadic cause.
Larsen,Gary L.,et al. “Respiratory Tract & Mediastinum.”In
Current Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment,ed. William W.
Hay Jr.,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997. Causes and symptoms
Nakeeb,Attila,and Keith D. Lillemoe. “Cholelithiasis and
Causes
Cholecystitis.”In Conn’s Current Therapy,1996,ed.
Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
There are more than a dozen viruses that can cause
Stauffer,John L. “Lung.”In Current Medical Diagnosis and
encephalitis,spread by either human-to human contact or
Treatment,1998.37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al.
by animal bites. Encephalitis may occur with several
Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997.
common viral infections of childhood. Viruses and viral
Turley,Kevin. “Thoracic Wall,Pleura,Mediastinum,and Lung.”
diseases that may cause encephalitis include:
In Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment. 10th ed. Ed.
Lawrence W. Way. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1994. •chickenpox
Whyte,Richard I. “Pleural Effusion and Empyema Thoracis.”
•measles
In Conn’s Current Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E. Rakel.
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996. •mumps
Rebecca J. Frey •Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1177
Encephalitis
•cytomegalovirus infection from a peripheral location to the brain via two nerves,the
olfactory and the trigeminal (largest nerves in the skull).
•HIV
Herpes simplex encephalitis is responsible for 10%
•herpes simplex
of all encephalitis cases and is the main cause of spo-
•herpes zoster (shingles) radic,fatal encephalitis. In untreated patients,the rate of
death is 70% while the mortality is 15–20% in patients
•herpes B
who have been treated with acyclovir. The symptoms of
•polio herpes simplex encephalitis are fever,rapidly disintegrat-
•rabies ing mental state,headache,and behavioral changes.
•mosquito-borne viruses (arboviruses)
Symptoms
Primary encephalitis is caused by direct infection by
The symptoms of encephalitis range from very mild
the virus,while secondary encephalitis is due to a post-
to very severe and may include:
infectious immune reaction to viral infection elsewhere in
the body. Secondary encephalitis may occur with measles, •headache
chickenpox, mumps, rubella, and EBV. In secondary
•fever
encephalitis,symptoms usually begin five to 10 days after
the onset of the disease itself and are related to the break- •lethargy (sleepiness,decreased alertness,and fatigue)
down of the myelin sheath that covers nerve fibers. •malaise
In rare cases,encephalitis may follow vaccination •nausea and vomiting
against some of the viral diseases listed above.
•visual disturbances
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a very rare brain disorder
caused by an infectious particle called a prion,may also •tremor
cause encephalitis. •decreased consciousness (drowsiness,confusion,delir-
Mosquitoes spread viruses responsible for equine ium,and unconsciousness)
encephalitis (eastern and western types), St. Louis •stiff neck
encephalitis, California encephalitis, and Japanese
•seizures
encephalitis. Lyme disease,spread by ticks,can cause
encephalitis,as can Colorado tick fever. Rabies is most Symptoms may progress rapidly, changing from
often spread by animal bites from dogs,cats,mice,rac- mild to severe within several days or even several hours.
coons,squirrels,and bats and may cause encephalitis.
Equine encephalitis is carried by mosquitoes that do Diagnosis
not normally bite humans but do bite horses and birds. It
Diagnosis of encephalitis includes careful question-
is occasionally picked up from these animals by mosqui-
ing to determine possible exposure to viral sources. Tests
toes that do bite humans. Japanese encephalitis and St.
that can help confirm the diagnosis and rule out other
Louis encephalitis are also carried by mosquitoes. The
disorders include:
risk of contracting a mosquito-borne virus is greatest in
mid- to late summer,when mosquitoes are most active, •Blood tests. These are to detect antibodies to viral anti-
in those rural areas where these viruses are known to gens,and foreign proteins.
exist. Eastern equine encephalitis occurs in eastern and
•Cerebrospinal fluid analysis (spinal tap). This detects
southeastern United States; western equine and Califor-
viral antigens,and provides culture specimens for the
nia encephalitis occur throughout the West; and St. Louis
virus or bacteria that may be present in the cere-
encephalitis occurs throughout the country. Japanese
brospinal fluid.
encephalitis does not occur in the United States,but is
•Electroencephalogram (EEG).
found throughout much of Asia. The viruses responsible
for these diseases are classified as arbovirus and these •CT and MRI scans.
diseases are collectively called arbovirus encephalitis.
A brain biopsy(surgical gathering of a small tissue
Herpes simplex encephalitis,the most common form sample) may be recommended in some cases where
of sporadic encephalitis in western countries,is a disease treatment to date has been ineffective and the cause of
with significantly high mortality. It occurs in children and the encephalitis is unclear. Definite diagnosis by biopsy
adults and both sides of the brain are affected. It is theo- may allow specific treatment that would otherwise be
rized that brain infection is caused by the virus moving too risky.
1178 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitilahpecnE
Treatment
KEY TERMS
Choice of treatment for encephalitis will depend on
the cause. Bacterial encephalitis is treated with antibi-
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis—A analysis that is
otics. Viral encephalitis is usually treated with antiviral
important in diagnosing diseases of the central
drugsincluding acyclovir,ganciclovir,foscarnet,ribo-
nervous system. The fluid within the spine will
varin,and AZT. Viruses that respond to acyclovir include
indicate the presence of viruses, bacteria, and
herpes simplex, the most common cause of sporadic
blood. Infections such as encephalitis will be indi-
(non-epidemic) encephalitis in the United States.
cated by an increase of cell count and total pro-
The symptoms of encephalitis may be treated with a
tein in the fluid.
number of different drugs. Corticosteroids, including
Computerized tomography (CT) Scan—A test to
prednisone and dexamethasone, are sometimes pre-
examine organs within the body and detect evi-
scribed to reduce inflammation and brain swelling. Anti-
dence of tumors, blood clots, and accumulation of
convulsant drugs,including dilantin and phenytoin,are
fluids.
used to control seizures. Fever may be reduced with
acetaminophenor other fever-reducing drugs. Electroencephalagram (EEG)—A chart of the brain
waves picked up by the electrodes placed on the
A person with encephalitis must be monitored care-
scalp. Changes in brain wave activity can be an
fully,since symptoms may change rapidly. Blood tests
indication of nervous system disorders.
may be required regularly to track levels of fluids and
salts in the blood. Inflammation—A response from the immune sys-
tem to an injury. The signs are redness, heat,
swelling, and pain.
Prognosis
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)—MRI is diag-
Encephalitis symptoms may last several weeks.
nostic radiography using electromagnetic energy
Most cases of encephalitis are mild,and recovery is usu-
to create an image of the central nervous system
ally quick. Mild encephalitis usually leaves no residual
(CNS), blood system, and musculoskeletal system.
neurological problems. Overall,approximately 10% of
those with encephalitis die from their infections or com- Vaccine—A prepartation containing killed or
plications such as secondary infection. Some forms of weakened microorganisms used to build immuni-
encephalitis have more severe courses,including herpes ty against infection from that microorganism.
encephalitis, in which mortality is 15–20% with treat-
Virus—A very small organism that can only live
ment,and 70–80% without. Antiviral treatment is inef-
within a cell. They are unable to reproduce out-
fective for eastern equine encephalitis,and mortality is
side that cell.
approximately 30%.
Permanent neurological consequences may follow
recovery in some cases. Consequences may include per-
sonality changes, memory loss, language difficulties, Vaccines are available against some viruses,includ-
seizures,and partial paralysis. ing polio, herpes B, Japanese encephalitis, and equine
encephalitis. Rabies vaccine is available for animals; it is
Prevention also given to people after exposure. Japanese encephalitis
vaccine is recommended for those traveling to Asia and
Because encephalitis is due to infection,it may be
staying in affected rural areas during transmission season.
prevented by avoiding the infection. Minimizing contact
with others who have any of the viral illness listed above
may reduce the chances of becoming infected. Most
Resources
infections are spread by hand-to-hand or hand-to-mouth
contact; frequent hand washing may reduce the likeli- BOOKS
hood of infection if contact cannot be avoided. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Mosquito-borne viruses may be avoided by prevent-
Hurst,J. Willis. Medicine for the Practicing Physician.Stam-
ing mosquito bites. Mosquitoes are most active at dawn
ford:Appleton & Lange,1988.
and dusk, and are most common in moist areas with
Office Practice of Neurology.Ed. Martin Samuels and Steven
standing water. Minimizing exposed skin and use of
Feske. New York:Churchill Livingstone,1996.
mosquito repellents on other areas can reduce the The Merck Manual.Whitehouse Station,NJ:Merck and Co.
chances of being bitten. Inc.,1996.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1179
Encephalitis
ORGANIZATIONS
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd.,
NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435,(404) 639-3311.
<http://www.cdc.gov>.
Richard Robinson
Encephalocele see Congenital brain defects
Endarterectomy
Definition
Endarterectomy is an operation to remove or bypass
the fatty deposits,or blockage,in an artery narrowed by
the buildup of fatty tissue (atherosclerosis).
Purpose
In this procedure,surgeons are removing plaque from the
Removing the fatty deposits restores normal blood carotid artery.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by
permission.)
flow to the part of the body supplied by the artery. An
endarterectomy is performed to treat cerebrovascular dis-
ease in which there is a serious reduction of blood supply •weakness in one arm,leg,half of the face,or one entire
to the brain (carotid endarterectomy),or to treat periph- side of the body
eral vascular disease(impaired blood supply to the legs). •numbness tingling
Endarterectomy is most often performed on one of •paralysisof an arm,leg,or face
the two main arteries in the neck (the carotids) opening
•slurred speech
the narrowed arteries leading to the brain. When per-
•dizziness
formed by an experienced surgeon, the practice is
extremely effective,reducing the risk of strokeby up to •confusion,fainting,or coma
70%. Recent studies indicate it is effective in preventing •stroke
stroke,even among those patients who had no warning
Removing this fatty buildup,or bypassing a blocked
signs except narrowed arteries detected by their doctors
segment,may restore blood flow to the brain,eliminate
on a routine exam.
or decrease the symptoms,and lessen the risk of a stroke.
Precautions Peripheral vascular disease
Before the surgery, a full medical exam is usually When the blood vessels in the legs (and sometimes
done to assess any specific health problems,such as dia- the arms) become narrowed,this can restrict blood flow
betes, high blood pressure, heart disease, or stroke. If and cause painin the affected area. In severe cases,the
possible, reversible health problems, such as cigarette tissue may die,requiring amputation.
smokingor being overweight,should be corrected. The narrowing is usually caused by buildup of fatty
plaques in the vessels, often as the result of smoking,
Description high blood pressure,or poorly-controlled diabetes melli-
tus. The vessels usually narrow slowly,but it’s possible
Carotid artery disease
for a blood clot to form quickly,causing sudden severe
Every person has four carotid arteries (the internal pain in the affected leg or arm.
and external carotids on each side of the neck) through
Procedure
which blood from the heart moves into the brain. If one
of these arteries becomes blocked by fat and cholesterol, Endarterectomy is a delicate operation that may
the patient may have a range of symptoms,including: require several hours. The surgeon begins by making an
1180 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ymotceretradnE
incision over the blocked artery and inserting a tube can expect to pay in the range of $15,000. Patients who
above and below the blockage to redirect the blood flow are very young,very old,or very ill,or who need more
while the artery is opened. extensive surgery,may require more expensive treatment.
Next, the surgeon removes the fat and cholesterol
buildup, along with any blood clots that have formed, Preparation
with a blunt dissecting instrument. Then the surgeon
Before surgery,the doctor pinpoints the location of
bathes the clean wall in salt solution combined with
the narrowed artery with an x-ray procedure called
heparin,an anticoagulant. Then the surgeon stitches the
angiography. For surgery to be effective,the degree of
artery just enough so that the bypass shunt tube can be
narrowing should be at least 70%, but it should not be
removed,and then he/she stitches the artery completely
total. Patients undergoing angiography are given a local
closed. After checking to make sure no blood is leaking,
anesthetic,but the endarterectomy itself requires the use
the surgeon next closes the skin incision with stitches.
of a general anesthesia.
The operation should improve symptoms,although
its long-term effects may be more limited,since arterial Aftercare
narrowing is rarely confined to one area of one artery. If
After the surgery, the patient spends the first two
narrowing is a problem throughout the body, arterial
days lying flat in bed. Patients who have had carotid
reconstructive surgery may be required.
endarterectomy should not bend the neck sharply during
The total cost of an endarterectomy,including diag- this time. Because the blood flow to the brain is now
nostic tests,surgery,hospitalization,and follow-up care, greatly increased, patients may experience a brief but
will vary according to hospital, doctor, and area of the severe headache, or lightheadedness. There may be a
country where the operation is performed,but a patient slight loss of sensation in the skin,or maybe a droop in
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1181
Endarterectomy
Plaque
Carotid
artery
Clamp
Plaque is removed from the carotid artery by clamping the artery,cutting the plaque out,and closing the opening back up.
(Illustration by Argosy Inc.)
buildup of fat and cholesterol usually affects all arteries,
KEY TERMS not just the one that was operated on. Affected arteries in
other parts of the body may be equally clogged and poten-
Carotid arteries—The four principal arteries of the tially dangerous. Even arteries that were operated elec-
neck and head. There are two common carotid tively will likely,begin to clog up again after the surgery.
arteries, each of which divides into the two main For this reason,lifestyle changes (no smoking,low
branches (internal and external). fat,low cholesterol diet) are important,especially if diet
Diabetes mellitus—A disorder in which the pan- and lifestyle contributed to the development of the prob-
creas doesn’t produce enough (or any) insulin. As lem in the first place.
a result, the blood levels of sugar become very
high. Among other things, diabetes can lead to the Resources
breakdown of small blood vessels and a high risk
BOOKS
of atherosclerosis and high blood pressure.
“Carotid Endarterectomy.”In The Surgery Book:An Illustrated
Stroke—Damage to the part of the brain caused Guide to 73 of the Most Common Operations,ed. Robert
by an interruption of the blood supply. In some M. Younson,et al. New York:St. Martin’s Press,1993.
cases, small pieces of plaque in the carotid artery
PERIODICALS
may break loose and block an artery in the brain.
“Better Blood Flow:Surgery May Strike Down Stroke Risk.”
A narrowed carotid artery also can be the source
Prevention47 (1 Feb. 1995):50-52.
of blood clots travelling to the brain, or the artery
can become completely clogged, blocking all ORGANIZATIONS
blood flow to the brain. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. PO
Box 5801,Bethesda,MD 20824. (800) 352-9424. <http://
www.ninds.nih.gov/index.htm>.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders at the Neurology
Institute. PO Box 5801,Bethesda,MD 20824.
the mouth,if any of the nerves in the neck were lightly
bruised during surgery. In time,this should correct itself.
Carol A. Turkington
Risks Endemic syphilis see Bejel
The amount of risk depends on the hospital,the skill Endocardial resection see Myocardial
of the surgeon, and the severity of underlying disease. resection
Patients who have just had an acute stroke are at greatest
risk. During carotid artery surgery,blood flow is inter-
rupted through the artery, so that paralysis and other
stroke symptoms may occur. These may resolve after
surgery,or may result in permanent stroke. Paralysis is
usually one-sided; other stroke symptoms may include Endocarditis
loss of half the field of vision,loss of sensation,double
vision,speech problems,and personality changes. Risks Definition
of endarterectomy to treat either carotid artery or periph-
The endocardium is the inner lining of the heart
eral vascular disease include:
muscle, which also covers the heart valves. When the
•reactions to anesthesia endocardium becomes damaged,bacteria from the blood
stream can become lodged on the heart valves or heart
•bleeding
lining. The resulting infection is known as endocarditis.
•infection
•blood clots
Description
The endocardium lines all four chambers of the
Normal results
heart—two at the top (the right and left atria) and two at
The results after successful surgery are usually strik- the bottom (the right and left ventricles)—through which
ing. The newly opened artery should help to restore nor- blood passes as the heart beats. It also covers the four
mal blood flow. In carotid endarterectomy,surgery should valves (the tricuspid valve, the pulmonary valve, the
prevent the risk of brain damage and stroke. However,the mitral valve,and the aortic valve),which normally open
1182 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitidracodnE
and close to allow the blood to flow in only one direction
through the heart during each contraction.
For the heart to pump blood efficiently, the four
chambers must contract and relax, and the four valves
must open and close,in a well coordinated fashion. By
damaging the valves or the walls of the heart chambers,
endocarditis can interfere with the ability of the heart to
do its job.
Endocarditis rarely occurs in people with healthy,
normal hearts. Rather, it most commonly occurs when
there is damage to the endocardium. The endocardium
may be affected by a congenital heart defect, such as
mitral valve prolapse,in which blood leaks through a
poorly functioning mitral valve back into the heart. It
may also be damaged by a prior scarring of the heart
muscle, such as rheumatic fever, or replacement of a
heart valve. Any of these conditions can damage the
endocardium and make it more susceptible to infection.
Bacteria can get into the blood stream (a condition
known as bacteremia) in a number of different ways:It
may spread from a localized infection such as a urinary
tract infection,pneumonia,or skin infection or get into may travel through the circulation and become lodged in
the blood stream as a result of certain medical condi- blood vessels. By blocking the flow of blood, emboli
tions,such as severe periodontal disease,colon cancer, can starve various tissues of nutrients and oxygen,dam-
or inflammatory bowel disease. It can enter the blood aging them. For instance, an embolus lodged in the
stream during minor procedures, such as periodontal blood vessels of the lungs may cause pneumonia-like
surgery,tooth extractions,teeth cleaning,tonsil removal, symptoms. An embolus may also affect the brain,dam-
prostate removal,or endoscopic examination. It can also aging nerve tissue,or the kidneys,causing kidney dis-
be introduced through in-dwelling catheters,which are ease. Emboli may also weaken the tiny blood vessels
used for intravenous medications,intravenous feeding,or called capillaries,causing hemorrhages (leaking blood
dialysis. In people who use intravenous drugs,the bacte- vessels) throughout the body.
ria can enter the blood stream through unsterilized,cont-
aminated needles and syringes. (People who are prone to
Causes and symptoms
endocarditis generally need to take prescribed antibi-
oticsbefore certain surgical or dental procedures to help Most cases of infective endocarditis occur in people
prevent this infection.) between the ages of 15 and 60, with a median age at
onset of about 50 years. Men are affected about twice as
If not discovered and treated,infective endocarditis
often as women are. Other factors that put people at
can permanently damage the heart muscle,especially the
increased risk for endocarditis are congenital heart prob-
valves. For the heart to work properly, all four valves
lems, heart surgery, previous episodes of endocarditis,
must be functioning well,opening at the right time to let
and intravenous drug use.
blood flow in the right direction and closing at the right
time to keep the blood from flowing in the wrong direc- While there is no single specific symptom of endo-
tion. If the valve is damaged,this may allow blood to flow carditis, a number of symptoms may be present. The
backward—a condition known as regurgitation. As a most common symptom is a mild fever, which rarely
result of a poorly functioning valve,the heart muscle has goes above 102°F (38.9°C). Other symptoms include
to work harder to pump blood and may become weak- chills,weakness,cough,trouble breathing,headaches,
ened,leading to heart failure. Heart failure is a chronic aching joints,and loss of appetite.
condition in which the heart is unable to pump blood well
Emboli may also cause a variety of symptoms,
enough to supply blood adequately to the body.
depending on their location. Emboli throughout the
Another danger associated with endocarditis is that body may cause Osler’s nodes,small,reddish,painful
the vegetation formed by bacteria colonizing on heart bumps most commonly found on the inside of fingers
valves may break off, forming emboli. These emboli and toes. Emboli may also cause petechiae,tiny purple
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1183
Endocarditis
A close-up view of an infected artificial heart valve showing
bacterial endocarditis (the granulated tissue at center of
image).When infection occurs early after surgery,it is likely
that organisms have gained entry during the operative peri-
od.This type of infection is usually caused by Staphylococ-
cus epidermidisand S.aureusand is treated with antibiotic
drugs.(Photograph by Dr.E.Walker, Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced by permission.)
called fibrin. Another tell-tale sign is regurgitation,or the
backward flow of blood,through one of the heart valves.
A normal echocardiogram does not exclude the possibili-
ty of endocarditis,but an abnormal echocardiogram can
confirm its presence. If an echocardiogram cannot be
done or its results are inconclusive,a modified technique
called transesophageal echocardiography is some-
times performed. Transesophageal echocardiography
involves passing an ultrasound device into the esophagus
to get a clearer image of the heart.
Treatment
When doctors suspect infective endocarditis, they
will admit the patient to a hospital and begin treating the
infection before they even have the results of the blood
culture. Their choice of antibiotics depends on what the
most likely infecting microorganism is. Once the results
of the blood culture become available, the doctor can
or red spots on the skin, resulting from hemorrhages
adjust the medications,using specific antibiotics known
under the skin’s surface. Tiny hemorrhages resembling
to be effective against the specific microorganism
splinters may also appear under the fingernails or toe-
involved.
nails. If emboli become lodged in the blood vessels of
the lungs, they may cause coughing or shortness of Unfortunately, in recent years, the treatment of
breath. Emboli lodged in the brain may cause symp- endocarditis has become more complicated as a result of
toms of a mini-stroke,such as numbness,weakness,or antibiotic resistance. Over the past few years,especially
paralysison one side of the body or sudden vision loss as antibiotics have been overprescribed,more and more
or double vision. Emboli may also damage the kidneys, strains of bacteria have become increasingly resistant to
causing blood to appear in the urine. Sometimes the cap- a wider range of antibiotics. For this reason,doctors may
illaries on the surface of the spleen rupture,causing the need to try a few different types of antibiotics—or even a
spleen to become enlarged and tender to the touch. Any- combination of antibiotics—to successfully treat the
one experiencing any of these symptoms should seek infection. Antibiotics are usually given for about one
medical help immediately. month,but may need to be given for an even longer peri-
od of time if the infection is resistant to treatment.
Once the fever and the worst of the symptoms have
Diagnosis
gone away,the patient may be able to continue antibiotic
Doctors begin the diagnosis by taking a history,ask- therapy at home. During this time, the patient should
ing the patient about the symptoms mentioned above. make regular visits to the health care team for further
During a physical examination, the doctor may also testing and physical examination to make sure that the
uncover signs such as fever,an enlarged spleen,signs of antibiotic therapy is working, that it is not causing
kidney disease, or hemorrhaging. Listening to the adverse side effects,and that there are no complications
patient’s chest with a stethoscope,the doctor may also such as emboli or heart failure. The patient should alert
hear a heart murmur. A heart murmur may indicate the health-care team to any symptoms that could indicate
abnormal flow of blood through one of the heart cham- serious complications:For instance,trouble breathing or
bers or valves. swelling in the legs could indicate congestive heart fail-
ure. Headache,joint pain,blood in the urine,or stroke
Doctors take a sample of the patient’s blood to test it
symptoms could indicate an embolus, and fever and
for bacteria and other microorganisms that may be caus-
chills could indicate that the treatment is not working and
ing the infection. They usually also use a test called
the infection is worsening. Finally,diarrhea,rash,itch-
echocardiography, which uses ultrasound waves to
ing, or joint pain may suggest a bad reaction to the
make images of the heart,to check for abnormalities in
antibiotics. Anyone experiencing any of these symptoms
the structure of the heart wall or valves. One of the tell-
should alert the health care team immediately.
tale signs they look for in echocardiography is vegeta-
tion,the abnormal growth of tissue around a valve com- In some cases, surgery may be needed. These
posed of blood platelets,bacteria,and a clotting protein include cases of congestive heart failure, recurring
1184 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitidracodnE
This echocardiogram shows an aortic regurgitation due to
endocarditis,an infection of the lining membrane of the car-
diac chambers.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by
permission.)
KEY TERMS
Aortic valve—The valve between the left ventricle associated with endocarditis, commonly found
of the heart and the aorta. inside the fingers or toes.
Bacteremia—An infection caused by bacteria in the Petechiae—Tiny purple or red spots on the skin
blood. associated with endocarditis, resulting from hemor-
rhages under the skin’s surface.
Congestive heart failure—A condition in which the
heart muscle cannot pump blood as efficiently as it Pulmonary valve—The valve between the right ven-
should. tricle of the heart and the pulmonary artery.
Transducer—A device that converts electrical sig-
Echocardiography—A diagnostic test using reflect-
nals into ultrasound waves and ultrasound waves
ed sound waves to study the structure and motion of
back into electrical impulses.
the heart muscle.
Transesophageal echocardiography—A diagnostic
Embolus—A bit of foreign material, such as gas, a
test using an ultrasound device, passed into the
piece of tissue, or tiny clot, that travels in the circu-
esophagus of the patient, to create a clear image of
lation until it becomes lodged in a blood vessel.
the heart muscle.
Endocardium—The inner wall of the heart muscle,
Tricuspid valve—The valve between the right atri-
which also covers the heart valves.
um and the right ventricle of the heart.
Mitral valve—The valve between the left atrium and
Vegetation—An abnormal growth of tissue around
the left ventricle of the heart.
a valve, composed of blood platelets, bacteria, and
Osler’s nodes—Small, raised, reddish, tender areas a protein involved in clotting.
emboli,infection that doesn’t respond to treatment,poor- Anyone who falls into a high-risk category should alert
ly functioning heart valves,and endocarditis involving his or her health-care professionals before undergoing
prosthetic (artificial) valves. The most common surgical any surgical or dental procedures. High-risk patients
treatment involves cutting away (debriding) damaged tis- must be treated in advance with antibiotics before these
sue and replacing the damaged valve. procedures to minimize the risk of infection.
Resources
Prognosis
BOOKS
If left untreated,infective endocarditis continues to
The Patient’s Guide to Medical Tests.Ed. Barry L. Zaret,et al.
progress and is always fatal. However,if it is diagnosed
Boston:Houghton Mifflin,1997.
and properly treated within the first six weeks of infec-
tion,the infection can be completely cured in about 90% PERIODICALS
of the cases. The prognosis depends on a number of fac- Auten,Gramce M.,and Victor Del Bene. “Endocarditis:Cur-
tors,such as the patient’s age and overall physical condi- rent Guidelines on Prophylaxis,Diagnosis,and Treat-
tion,the severity of the diseases involved,the exact site ment.”Consultant36 (May 1996):973-78.
of the infection,how vulnerable the microorganisms are
ORGANIZATIONS
to antibiotics,and what kind of complications the endo-
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,TX
carditis may be causing.
75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. PO Box 30105,
Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
Prevention
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
Some people are especially prone to endocarditis.
Robert Scott Dinsmoor
These include people with past episodes of endocarditis,
those with congenital heart problems or heart damage
Endocrine pancreatic cancer see Pancreatic
from rheumatic fever, and those with artificial heart
valves. Intravenous drug users are also at increased risk. cancer, endocrine
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1185
Endocarditis
Endometrial biopsy
Definition
Endometrial biopsy is a procedure in which a sam-
ple of the endometrium (tissue lining the inside of the
uterus) is removed for microscopic examination.
Purpose
The test is most often performed to find out the
cause of abnormal uterine bleeding. Abnormal bleeding
includes bleeding between menstrual periods,excessive
bleeding during a menstrual period, or bleeding after
menopause. Since abnormal uterine bleeding can indi-
cate cancer, an endometrial biopsy is done to rule out
endometrial cancer or hyperplasia (a potentially pre-
cancerous condition).
The woman will be asked to lie on her back with
Endometrial biopsies are also done as a screening
knees apart and feet in stirrups. The doctor will first con-
test for endometrial cancer in postmenopausal women on
duct a thorough exam of the pelvic region,including the
hormone replacement therapy. Hormone replacement
vulva (the external genitals),vagina,and uterus. A specu-
therapy usually requires a woman to take estrogen and
lum (an instrument that is used to hold the walls of the
progesterone. An endometrial biopsy is particularly use-
vagina open) will be inserted into the vagina. A small,
ful in cases where postmenopausal women take estrogen,
hollow plastic tube is then passed into the uterine cavity.
but cannot take progesterone. Estrogen in the system
A small piece of the uterine lining is sucked out with a
without the balancing effect of progesterone has been
plunger that is attached to the tube. Once the sample is
linked to an increased risk of endometrial cancer.
obtained, the instruments are removed. The sample is
An endometrial biopsy can also be used as part of an sent to the laboratory for microscopic examination.
infertility exam to rule out problems with the develop-
The patient may experience some pain when the
ment of the endometrium. This condition is called luteal
cervix is grasped. The patient may also feel some cramp-
phase defect and can cause the endometrium to not sup-
ing,pressure,and discomfort when the instruments are
port a pregnancy. An endometrial biopsy can also be used
inserted into the uterus and the tissue sample is collected.
to evaluate the problem of repeated early miscarriages.
Preparation
Precautions
For the small number of endometrial biopsies that
If the endometrial biopsy is being done to investigate
are done as part of infertility testing,a pregnancy test is
why a woman is unable to get pregnant,the test must be
also often performed before the procedure. Since the
performed at a specific time during the menstrual cycle.
biopsy is performed late in the menstrual cycle,it is pos-
Since the test evaluates whether the endometrium is
sible that the woman may be pregnant.
developed adequately to support implantation and growth
of a fertilized egg,it is critical to perform the test approxi-
mately three days before the expected menstrual period. Aftercare
The biopsy may cause a small amount of bleeding
Description (spotting). The woman can resume normal activities right
away. If cramping becomes severe, heavy bleeding
The test is performed by a doctor who specializes in
occurs,or the woman develops a high temperature,the
women’s reproductive health (an obstetrician/gynecolo-
doctor should be notified immediately.
gist). The test is performed either in the doctor’s office or
in a local hospital. The patient may be asked to take pain If the test is being done to determine the cause of
medication (like Motrin or Aleve) an hour or so before infertility,the onset of the menstrual period following the
the procedure. A local anesthetic may be injected into the biopsy should be reported to the doctor. This will allow
cervix in order to decrease pain and discomfort during the doctor to correctly predict if the endometrium has
the procedure. been developing at the expected rate.
1186 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yspoib
lairtemodnE
KEY TERMS
Biopsy—The surgical removal and microscopic
examination of living tissue for diagnostic purposes.
Cervix—The opening of the uterus extending into
the vagina.
Endometrium—The layer lining the inner cavity of
the uterus; this layer changes daily throughout the
menstrual cycle.
Uterus—The hollow, muscular female organ that
supports the development and nourishment of the
unborn baby during pregnancy.
Risks called luteal phase defect and may need to be treated
with progesterone.
The risks of an endometrial biopsy are very small.
Abnormal appearance of the cells forming the uter-
There is a possibility that prolonged bleeding may occur
ine tissue could also indicate uterine cancer,or the pres-
after the procedure. There is also a slight chance of an
ence of fibroids or polyps in the uterus.
infection. Very rarely,there are instances when the uterus
is pierced (perforated) or the cervix is torn because of the
biopsy. Resources
BOOKS
Normal results The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.16th ed. Ed. Robert
Berkow. Rahway,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,1992.
Most biopsies are done to rule out endometrial cancer Piotrowski,Nancy A.,ed. “Endometrial Biopsy.”In Magill’s
or endometrial hyperplasia. A normal result shows no can- Medical Guide Health and Illness Supplement.Vol. 4.
cerous or precancerous cells. Normal results also show Pasadena:Salem Press,1996.
that the uterine lining is changing at the proper rate. If it is,
ORGANIZATIONS
then the results of the biopsy are said to be “in-phase”
American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Rd.,NE,Atlanta,GA
because the tissue looks appropriate and has developed 30329-4251. (800) 227-2345. <http://www.cancer.org>.
normally for the late phase of the menstrual cycle. Cancer Research Institute. 681 Fifth Ave.,New York,NY
10022. (800) 992-2623. <http://www.cancerresearch.org>.
Gynecologic Cancer Foundation. 401 North Michigan Ave.,
Abnormal results
Chicago,IL 60611. (800) 444-4441.
National Cancer Institute. Building 31,Room 10A31,31 Cen-
If the endometrium is not developing at the appro-
ter Drive,MSC 2580,Bethesda,MD 20892-2580. (800)
priate rate, the results are said to be “out-of-phase” or
422-6237. <http://www.nci.nih.gov>.
abnormal. The endometrium has not developed appropri-
ately and cannot support a pregnancy. This condition is Lata Cherath,PhD
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1187
Endometrial
biopsy
Uterus
Vagina
Catheter
A catheter is inserted into the uterus to remove uterine cells for further examination.(Illustration by Argosy Inc.)
growth of the endometrium. Factors that increase a
Endometrial cancer woman’s risk of developing endometrial cancer are:
•Age. The risk is considerably higher in women who are
Definition
over the age of 50 and have gone through menopause.
Endometrial cancer develops when the cells that
•Obesity. Being overweight is a very strong risk factor
make up the inner lining of the uterus (the endometrium)
for this cancer. Fatty tissue can change other normal
become abnormal and grow uncontrollably.
body chemicals into estrogen, which can promote
endometrial cancer.
Description
•Estrogen replacement therapy. Women receiving estro-
Endometrial cancer (also called uterine cancer) is gen supplements after menopause have a 12 times high-
the fourth most common type of cancer among women er risk of getting endometrial cancer if progesterone is
and the most common gynecologic cancer. Approximate- not taken simultaneously.
ly 34,000 women are diagnosed with endometrial cancer •Diabetes. Diabetics have twice the risk of getting this
each year. In 1998, approximately 6,300 women died cancer as nondiabetic women. It is not clear if this risk
from this cancer. Although endometrial cancer generally is due to the fact that many diabetics are also obese and
occurs in women who have gone through menopause hypertensive. One 1998 study found that women who
and are 45 years of age or older,30% of the women with were obese and diabetic were three times more likely to
endometrial cancer are younger than 40 years of age. The develop endometrial cancer than women who were
average age at diagnosis is 60 years old. obese but nondiabetic. This study also found that
The uterus,or womb,is the hollow female organ that nonobese diabetics were not at risk of developing
supports the development of the unborn baby during endometrial cancer.
pregnancy. The uterus has a thick muscular wall and an •Hypertension. High blood pressure (or hypertension)
inner lining called the endometrium. The endometrium is is also considered a risk factor for uterine cancer.
very sensitive to hormones and it changes daily during
•Irregular menstrual periods. During the menstrual
the menstrual cycle. The endometrium is designed to
cycle,there is interaction between the hormones estro-
provide an ideal environment for the fertilized egg to
gen and progesterone. Women who do not ovulate regu-
implant and begin to grow. If pregnancy does not occur,
larly are exposed to high estrogen levels for longer peri-
the endometrium is shed causing the menstrual period.
ods of time. If a woman does not ovulate regularly,this
More than 95% of uterine cancers arise in the delicate balance is upset and may increase her chances
endometrium. The most common type of uterine cancer of getting uterine cancer.
is adenocarcinoma. It arises from an abnormal multipli-
•Early first menstruation or late menopause. Having
cation of endometrial cells (atypical adenomatous hyper-
the first period at a young age (the mean age of
plasia) and is made up of mature,specialized cells (well-
menses is 12.16 years in African American girls and
differentiated). Less commonly,endometrial cancer aris-
12.88 years in caucasian girls) or going through
es without a preceding hyperplasia and is made up of
menopause at a late age (over age 51) seem to put
poorly differentiated cells. The more common of these
women at a slightly higher risk for developing
types are the papillary serous and clear cell carcinomas.
endometrial cancer.
Poorly differentiated endometrial cancers are often asso-
ciated with a less promising prognosis. •Tamoxifen. This drug,which is used to treat or prevent
breast cancer,increases a woman’s chance of develop-
The highest incidence of endometrial cancer in the
ing endometrial cancer. Tamoxifen users tend to have
United States is in Caucasians,Hawaiians,Japanese,and
more advanced endometrial cancer with an associated
African Americans. American Indians, Koreans, and
poorer survival rate than those who do not take the
Vietnamese have the lowest incidence. African American
drug. In many cases,however,the value of tamoxifen
and Hawaiian women are more likely to be diagnosed
for treating breast cancer and for preventing the cancer
with advanced cancer and,therefore,have a higher risk
from spreading far outweighs the small risk of getting
of dying from the disease.
endometrial cancer.
•Family history. Some studies suggest that endometrial
Causes and symptoms
cancer runs in certain families. Women with inherited
Although the exact cause of endometrial cancer is mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are at a
unknown, it is clear that high levels of estrogen, when higher risk of developing breast, ovarian, and other
not balanced by progesterone, can lead to abnormal gynecologic cancers. Those with the hereditary non-
1188 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnac
lairtemodnE
polyposis colorectal cancer gene have a higher risk of gone through menopause,any vaginal bleeding or abnor-
developing endometrial cancer. mal discharge is suspect. Painin the pelvic region and
the presence of a lump (mass) are symptoms that occur
•Breast,ovarian,or colon cancer. Women who have a
late in the disease.
history of these other types of cancer are at an increased
risk of developing endometrial cancer.
Diagnosis
•Low parity or nulliparity. Endometrial cancer is more
common in women who have born few (low parity) or If endometrial cancer is suspected,a series of tests
no (nulliparity) children. The high levels of proges- will be conducted to confirm the diagnosis. The first
terone produced during pregnancy has a protective step will involve taking a complete personal and family
effect against endometrial cancer. The results of one medical history. A physical examination, which will
study suggest that nulliparity is associated with a lower include a thorough pelvic examination, will also be
survival rate. done.
The doctor may order an endometrial biopsy. This
•Infertility. Risk is increased due to nulliparity or the use
is generally performed in the doctor’s office and does not
of fertility drugs.
require anesthesia. A thin, flexible tube is inserted
•Polycystic ovary syndrome. The increased level of through the cervix and into the uterus. A small piece of
estrogen associated with this abnormality raises the risk endometrial tissue is removed. The patient may experi-
of cancers of the breast and endometrium. ence some discomfort,which can be minimized by tak-
ing an anti-inflammatory medication (like Advil or
The most common symptom of endometrial cancer
Motrin) an hour before the procedure.
is unusual vaginal spotting, bleeding, or discharge. In
women who are near menopause (perimenopausal), If an adequate amount of tissue was not obtained by
symptoms of endometrial cancer could include bleeding the endometrial biopsy, or if the biopsy tissue looks
between periods (intermenstrual bleeding),heavy bleed- abnormal but confirmation is needed,the doctor may per-
ing that lasts for more than seven days,or short menstru- form a dilatation and curettage(D & C). This procedure
al cycles (fewer than 21 days). For women who have is done in the outpatient surgery department of a hospital
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1189
Endometrial
cancer
Cancer located in the uterus.(Illustration by Argosy Inc.)
KEY TERMS
Adjuvant therapy—A treatment done when there is Endometrium—The mucosal layer lining the inner
no evidence of residual cancer in order to aid the cavity of the uterus. The endometrium’s structure
primary treatment. Adjuvant treatments for endome- changes with age and with the menstrual cycle.
trial cancer are radiation therapy, chemotherapy,
Estrogen—A female hormone responsible for stimu-
and hormone therapy.
lating the development and maintenance of female
Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia—The over- secondary sexual characteristics.
growth of the endometrium. This precancerous con-
Estrogen replacement therapy (ERT)—A treatment
dition is estimated to progress to cancer in one third
in which estrogen is used therapeutically during
of the cases.
menopause to alleviate certain symptoms such as
hot flashes. ERT has also been shown to reduce the
Dilation and curettage (D & C)—A procedure in
risk of osteoporosis and heart disease in women.
which the doctor opens the cervix and uses a spe-
cial instrument to scrape tissue from the inside of Progesterone—A female hormone that acts on the
the uterus. inner lining of the uterus and prepares it for implan-
tation of the fertilized egg.
Endometrial biopsy—A procedure in which a sam-
ple of the endometrium is removed and examined Progestins—A female hormone, like progesterone,
under a microscope. that acts on the inner lining of the uterus.
and takes about an hour. The patient may be given general endometrial cancer. The stage of cancer is determined after
anesthesia. The doctor dilates the cervix and uses a spe- surgery. Endometrial cancer is categorized into four stages
cial instrument to scrape tissue from inside the uterus. (I,II,III,and IV) that are subdivided (A,B,and possibly C)
based on the depth or spread of cancerous tissue. Seventy
The tissue that is obtained from the biopsy or the D &
percent of all uterine cancers are stage I,10–15% are stage
C is sent to a laboratory for examination. If cancer is found,
II,and the remainder are stages III and IV. The cancer is
then the type of cancer will be determined. The treatment
also graded (G1, G2, and G3) based upon microscopic
and prognosis depends on the type and stage of the cancer.
analysis of the aggressiveness of the cancer cells.
Trans-vaginal ultrasound may be used to measure the
The FIGO stages for endometrial cancer are:
thickness of the endometrium. For this painless procedure,
a wand-like ultrasound transducer is inserted into the vagi- •Stage I. Cancer is limited to the uterus.
na to enable visualization and measurement of the uterus,
•Stage II. Cancer involves the uterus and cervix.
the thickness of the uterine lining,and other pelvic organs.
•Stage III. Cancer has spread out of the uterus but is
Other possible diagnostic procedures include sono-
restricted to the pelvic region.
hysterography and hysteroscopy. For sonohysteroscopy,
•Stage IV. Cancer has spread to the bladder,bowel,or
a small tube is passed through the cervix and into the
other distant locations.
uterus. A small amount of a salt water (saline) solution is
injected through the tube to open the space within the The mainstay of treatment for most stages of
uterus and allow ultrasound visualization of the endometrial cancer is surgery. Radiation therapy,hor-
endometrium. For hysteroscopy,a wand-like camera is monal therapy,and chemotherapyare additional treat-
passed through the cervix to allow direct visualization of ments (called adjuvant therapy). The necessity of adju-
the endometrium. Both of these procedures cause dis- vant therapy is a controversial topic which should be dis-
comfort,which may be reduced by taking an anti-inflam- cussed with the patient’s treatment team.
matory medication prior to the procedure.
Surgery
Treatment Most women with endometrial cancer,except those
with stage IV disease,are treated with a hysterectomy. A
Clinical staging
simple hysterectomy involves the removal of the uterus.
The International Federation of Gynecology and In a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with total hys-
Obstetrics (FIGO) has adopted a staging system for terectomy, the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and uterus are
1190 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnac
lairtemodnE
removed. This may be necessary because endometrial ing cancer,but they can reduce stressand lessen some of
cancer often spreads to the ovaries first. The lymph nodes the side effects of cancer treatments. Clinical studies of
in the pelvic region may also be biopsied or removed to hydrazine sulfate found that it had no effect on cancer and
check for metastasis. Hysterectomy is traditionally per- even worsened the health and well-being of the study sub-
formed through an incision in the abdomen (laparotomy), jects. One clinical study of the drug amygdalin (Laetrile)
however,endoscopic surgery (laparoscopy) with vaginal found that it had no effect on cancer. Laetrile can be toxic
hysterectomy is also being used. Women with stage I dis- and has caused deaths. Shark cartilage, although highly
ease may require no further treatment. However, those touted as an effective cancer treatment,is an improbable
with higher grade disease will receive adjuvant therapy. therapy that has not been the subject of clinical study.
The American Cancer Society has found that the
Radiation therapy
“metabolic diets” pose serious risk to the patient. The
The decision to use radiation therapy depends on the effectiveness of the macrobiotic,Gerson,and Kelley diets
stage of the disease. Radiation therapy may be used and the Manner metabolic therapy has not been scientifi-
before surgery (preoperatively) and/or after surgery cally proven. The FDA was unable to substantiate the anti-
(postoperatively). Radiation given from a machine that is cancer claims made about the popular Cancell treatment.
outside the body is called external radiation therapy.
There is no evidence for the effectiveness of most
Sometimes applicators containing radioactive com-
over-the-counter herbal cancer remedies. Some herbals
pounds are placed inside the vagina or uterus. This is
have shown an anticancer effect. As shown in clinical
called internal radiation therapy or brachytherapy and
studies, Polysaccharide krestin, from the mushroom
requires hospitalization.
Coriolus versicolor,has significant effectiveness against
Side effects are common with radiation therapy. The cancer. In a small study, the green alga Chlorella
skin in the treated area may become red and dry. pyrenoidosahas been shown to have anticancer activity.
Fatigue,upset stomach,diarrhea,and nausea are also In a few small studies,evening primrose oil has shown
common complaints. Radiation therapy in the pelvic area some benefit in the treatment of cancer.
may cause the vagina to become narrow (vaginal steno-
sis),making intercourse painful. Premature menopause Prognosis
and some problems with urination may also occur.
Because it is possible to detect endometrial cancer
early,the chances of curing it are excellent. The five year
Chemotherapy
survival rates for endometrial cancer by stage are:90%,
Chemotherapy is usually reserved for women with stage I; 60%,stage II; 40%,stage III; and 5%,stage IV.
stage IV or recurrent disease because this therapy is not a Endometrial cancer most often spreads to the lungs,liver,
very effective treatment for endometrial cancer. The bones,brain,vagina,and certain lymph nodes.
anticancer drugsare given by mouth or intravenously.
Side effects include stomach upset, vomiting, appetite
Prevention
loss,hair loss,mouth or vaginal sores,fatigue,menstrual
Women (especially postmenopausal women) should
cycle changes,and premature menopause. There is also
report any abnormal vaginal bleeding or discharge to the
an increased chance of infections.
doctor. Controlling obesity,blood pressure,and diabetes
can help to reduce the risk of this disease. Women on
Hormonal therapy
estrogen replacement therapy have a substantially
Hormonal therapy uses drugs like progesterone to
reduced risk of endometrial cancer if progestins are taken
slow the growth of endometrial cells. These drugs are
simultaneously. Long term use of birth control pills has
usually available as pills. This therapy is usually reserved
been shown to reduce the risk of this cancer. Women who
for women with advanced or recurrent disease. Side
have irregular periods may be prescribed birth control
effects include fatigue,fluid retention,and appetite and
pills to help prevent endometrial cancer. Women who are
weight changes.
taking tamoxifen and those who carry the hereditary non-
polyposis colorectal cancer gene should be screened reg-
Alternative treatment ularly,receiving annual pelvic examinations.
Although alternative and complementary therapies are
used by many cancer patients,very few controlled studies Resources
on the effectiveness of such therapies exist. Mind-body BOOKS
techniques, such as prayer, biofeedback, visualization, Bruss,Katherine,Christina Salter,and Esmeralda Galan,eds.
meditation,and yoga,have not shown any effect in reduc- American Cancer Society’s Guide to Complementary and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1191
Endometrial
cancer
Alternative Cancer Methods.Atlanta:American Cancer in other parts of the body. Like the uterine lining,this tis-
Society,2000. sue builds up and sheds in response to monthly hormonal
Burke,Thomas,Patricia Eifel,and Muggia Franco. “Cancers cycles. However,there is no natural outlet for the blood
of the Uterine Body.”In Cancer:Principles & Practice of discarded from these implants. Instead,it falls onto sur-
Oncology,ed. Vincent DeVita,Samuel Hellman,and
rounding organs,causing swelling and inflammation. This
Steven Rosenberg. Philadelphia:Lippincott Williams &
repeated irritation leads to the development of scar tissue
Wilkins,2001,1573– 86.
and adhesions in the area of the endometrial implants.
Long,Harry. “Carcinoma of the Endometrium.”In Current
Therapy in Cancer,ed. John Foley,Julie Vose,and James
Armitage. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Company,1999, Description
162–66.
Primack,Aron. “Complementary/Alternative Therapies in the Endometriosis is estimated to affect 7% of women of
Prevention and Treatment of Cancer.”In Complemen- childbearing age in the United States. It most commonly
tary/Alternative Medicine:An Evidence- Based Approach, strikes between the ages of 25 and 40. Endometriosis can
ed. John Spencer and Joseph Jacobs. St. Louis:Mosby, also appear in the teen years,but never before the start of
1999,123–69.
menstruation. It is seldom seen in postmenopausal
PERIODICALS women.
Bristow,Robert. “Endometrial Cancer.”Current Opinion in
Endometriosis was once called the “career woman’s
Oncology11 (Sept. 1999):388–393.
disease” because it was thought to be a product of
Canavan,Timothy and Nipa Doshi. “Endometrial Cancer.”
delayed childbearing. The statistics defy such a narrow
American Family Physician59 (June 1999):3069–3077.
generalization; however, pregnancy may slow the
Elit,Laurie. “Endometrial Cancer:Prevention,Detection,Man-
progress of the condition. A more important predictor of
agement,and Follow up.”Canadian Family Physician46
(Apr. 2000):887–892. a woman’s risk is if her female relatives have endome-
Hogberg,Thomas,Margareta Fredstorp,and Anuja Jhingran. triosis. Another influencing factor is the length of a
“Indications for Adjuvant Radiotherapy in Endometrial woman’s menstrual cycle. Women whose periods last
Carcinoma.”Hematology/Oncology Clinics of North longer than a week with an interval of less than 27 days
America:Current Therapeutic Issues in Gynecologic between them seem to be more prone to the condition.
Cancer13 (Feb. 1999):189–209.
Endometrial implants are most often found on the
ORGANIZATIONS pelvic organs—the ovaries,uterus,fallopian tubes,and in
American Cancer Society,National Headquarters. 1599 Clifton the cavity behind the uterus. Occasionally, this tissue
Rd. NE,Atlanta,GA 30329. (800) 227-2345. <http://
grows in such distant parts of the body as the lungs,arms,
www.cancer.org/>.
and kidneys. Newly formed implants appear as small
Cancer Research Institute,National Headquarters. 681 Fifth
bumps on the surfaces of the organs and supporting liga-
Ave.,New York,NY 10022. (800) 992-2623. <http://
ments and are sometimes said to look like “powder burns.”
www.cancerresearch.org>.
Gynecologic Cancer Foundation. 401 North Michigan Ave., Ovarian cysts may form around endometrial tissue
Chicago,IL 60611. (800) 444-4441. <http://www.wcn.org>. (endometriomas) and may range from pea to grapefruit
National Cancer Institute,National Institutes of Health. 9000 size. Endometriosis is a progressive condition that usually
Rockville Pike,Bethesda,MD 20892. (800) 422-6237. advances slowly,over the course of many years. Doctors
<http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/>. rank cases from minimal to severe based on factors such as
the number and size of the endometrial implants, their
OTHER
appearance and location,and the extent of the scar tissue
“Cancer of the Uterus.”Cancernet.Dec. 2000. 13 Mar. 2001
<http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov/wyntk_pubs/uterus.htm>. and adhesions in the vicinity of the growths.
Lata Cherath
Causes and symptoms
Belinda Rowland,Ph.D.
Although the exact cause of endometriosis is
unknown,a number of theories have been put forward.
Some of the more popular ones are:
•Implantation theory. Originally proposed in the 1920s,
Endometriosis
this theory states that a reversal in the direction of men-
strual flow sends discarded endometrial cells into the
Definition
body cavity where they attach to internal organs and
Endometriosis is a condition in which bits of the tis- seed endometrial implants. There is considerable evi-
sue similar to the lining of the uterus (endometrium) grow dence to support this explanation. Reversed menstrual
1192 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisoirtemodnE
flow occurs in 70–90% of women and is thought to be
more common in women with endometriosis. However,
many women with reversed menstrual flow do not
develop endometriosis.
•Vascular-lymphatic theory. This theory suggests that
the lymph system or blood vessels (vascular system) is
the vehicle for the distribution of endometrial cells out
of the uterus.
•Coelomic metaplasia theory. According to this hypothe-
sis,remnants of tissue left over from prenatal develop-
ment of the woman’s reproductive tract transforms into
endometrial cells throughout the body.
•Induction theory. This explanation postulates that an
unidentified substance found in the body forces cells
from the lining of the body cavity to change into
endometrial cells.
In addition to these theories,the following factors are
thought to influence the development of endometriosis:
•Heredity. A woman’s chance of developing endometrio-
sis is seven times greater if her mother or sisters have
the disease.
•Immune system function. Women with endometriosis
the build up of scar tissue and adhesions blocks the
may have lower functioning immune systems that have
fallopian tubes and prevents the ovaries from releasing
trouble eliminating stray endometrial cells. This would
eggs. Endometriosis may also affect fertility by caus-
explain why a high percentage of women experience
ing hormonal irregularities and a higher rate of early
reversed menstrual flow while relatively few develop
miscarriage.
endometriosis.
•Dioxin exposure. Some research suggests a link
between the exposure to dioxin (TCCD),a toxic chemi- Diagnosis
cal found in weed killers, and the development of
If a doctor suspects endometriosis,the first step will
endometriosis.
be to perform a pelvic examto try to feel if implants are
While many women with endometriosis suffer debil- present. Very often there is no strong evidence of
itating symptoms,others have the disease without know- endometriosis from a physical exam. The only way to
ing it. Paradoxically,there does not seem to be any rela- make a definitive diagnosis is through minor surgery
tion between the severity of the symptoms and the extent called a laparoscopy. A laparoscope,a slender scope with
of the disease. The most common symptoms are: a light on the end,is inserted into the woman’s abdomen
through a small incision near her belly button. This allows
•Menstrual pain. Pain in the lower abdomen that begins
the doctor to examine the internal organs for endometriotic
a day or two before the menstrual period starts and con-
growths. Often,a sample of tissue is taken for later exami-
tinues through to the end is typical of endometriosis.
nation in the laboratory. Endometriosis is sometimes dis-
Some women also report lower back aches and pain
covered when a woman has abdominal surgery for another
during urination and bowel movement,especially dur-
reason such as tubal ligationor hysterectomy.
ing their periods.
Various imaging techniques such as ultrasound,
•Painful sexual intercourse. Pressure on the vagina and
computed tomography scan (CT scan),or magnetic res-
cervix causes severe pain for some women.
onance imaging(MRI) can offer additional information
•Abnormal bleeding. Heavy menstrual periods,irregular
but aren’t useful in making the initial diagnosis. A blood
bleeding, and spotting are common features of
test may also be ordered because women with
endometriosis.
endometriosis have higher levels of the blood protein
•Infertility. There is a strong association between CA125. Testing for this substance before and after treat-
endometriosis and infertility,although the reasons for ment can predict a recurrence of the disease,but the test
this have not been fully explained. It is thought that is not reliable as a diagnostic tool.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1193
Endometriosis
An endoscopic view of endometriosis on pelvic wall.(Cus-
tom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Treatment her ability to bear children and forces her body into
menopause. Endometrial implants and ovarian cysts can
How endometriosis is treated depends on the
be removed with laser surgery performed through a
woman’s symptoms,her age,the extent of the disease,
laparoscope. For women with minimal endometriosis,
and her personal preferences. The condition cannot be
this technique is usually successful in reducing pain and
fully eradicated without surgery. Conservative treatment
slowing the condition’s progress. It may also help infer-
focuses on managing the pain,preserving fertility,and
tile women increase their chances of becoming pregnant.
delaying the progress of the condition.
Alternative treatment
Pain relief
Although severe endometriosis should not be self-
Over-the-counter pain relievers such as aspirin
treated,many women find they can help their condition
and acetaminophen (Tylenol) are useful for mild
through alternative therapies. Taking vitamin B complex
cramping and menstrual pain. Prescription-strength
combined with vitaminsC,E,and the mineralscalcium,
and over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
magnesium, and selenium can help the depression and
drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil)
lack of energy that may accompany endometriosis. B vit-
and naproxen (Naprosyn),are also effective. If pain is
amins also counteract the side effects of hormonal drugs.
severe, a doctor may prescribe narcotic medications,
Other women have found relief when they turned to a
although these can be addicting and are rarely used.
macrobiotic diet. Less extreme dietsthat cut out sugar,
salt,and processed foods are sometimes helpful as well.
Hormonal treatments
Mind-body therapies such as relaxation and visualization
Hormonal therapies effectively tame endometriosis
help women cope with pain. Other avenues to combat
but also act as contraceptives. A woman who is hoping to
pain include acupunctureand biofeedbacktechniques.
become pregnant would take these medications for a
Still other women report positive results after being treat-
period of time, then try to conceive within several
ed by chiropractors or homeopathic doctors.
months of discontinuing treatment.
•Oral contraceptives. Continuously taking estrogen-
Prognosis
progestin pills tricks the body into thinking it is preg-
Most women who have endometriosis have minimal
nant. This state of pseudopregnancy means reduced
symptoms and do well. Overall, endometriosis symp-
pelvic pain and a temporary withering of endometrial
toms come back in an average of 40% of women over the
implants.
five years following treatment. With hormonal therapy,
•Danazol (Danocrine) and gestrinone are synthetic male
pain returned after five years in 37% of patients with
hormones that lower estrogen levels,prevent menstrua-
minimal symptoms and 74% of those with severe cases.
tion,and shrink endometrial tissues. On the downside,
The highest success rate from conservative treatment fol-
they lead to weight gain and menopause-like symp-
lowed complete removal of implants using laser surgery.
toms, and cause some women to develop masculine
Eighty percent of these women were still pain-free five
characteristics.
years later. In cases that don’t respond to these treat-
•Progestins. Medroxyprogesterone (Depo-Provera) and ments,a woman and her doctor may consider surgery to
related drugs may also be used in treating endometrio- remove her reproductive organs.
sis. They have been proven effective in minimizing pain
and halting the progress of the condition,but are rarely
Prevention
used because of the high rate of side effects.
There is no proven way to prevent endometriosis.
•Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnHR) agonists.
One study,however,indicated that girls who begin par-
These estrogen-inhibiting drugs successfully limit pain
ticipating in aerobic exerciseat a young age are less like-
and prevent the growth of endometrial implants. They
ly to develop the condition.
can cause menopausesymptoms,however,and doses
have to be regulated to prevent bone loss associated
Resources
with low estrogen levels.
BOOKS
Surgery Breitkopf,Lyle J. Coping With Endometriosis.Prentice Hall,
1988.
Removing the uterus,ovaries,and fallopian tubes is
D’Hooghe,Thomas M.,and Joseph A. Hill. “Endometriosis.”
the only permanent method of eliminating endometrio- In Novak’s Gynecology.12th ed. Ed. Jonathan S. Berek,et
sis. This is an extreme measure that deprives a woman of al. Baltimore:Lippincott,1996.
1194 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisoirtemodnE
sound waves (ultrasound waves) are generated. The pat-
KEY TERMS tern of echoes as they bounce off tissues is converted into
a picture (sonogram) on a television screen.
Adhesions—Web-like scar tissue that may develop
as a result of endometriosis and bind organs to Purpose
one another.
ERUS is used as a diagnostic procedure in rectal
Dioxin—A toxic chemical found in weed killers
cancerto determine stage of the tumor and as a postradi-
that has been linked to the development of
ation,presurgical examination to assess extent of tumor
endometriosis.
shrinkage. ERUS can also be used in cases of anal fistula
Endometrial implants—Growths of endometrial (an abnormal passage) and problems with the anal
tissue that attach to organs, primarily in the pelvic sphincter muscles (muscles that control the opening and
cavity. closing of the anus).
Endometrium—The tissue lining the uterus that
grows and sheds each month during a woman’s
Precautions
menstrual cycle.
Normal precautions should be taken with any diag-
Estrogen—A female hormone that promotes the
nostic procedure. Since the population in which this pro-
growth of endometrial tissue.
cedure is normally done is elderly, the imaging staff
Hormonal therapy—Use of hormone medications
should be extra cautious about stressing the patient. The
to inhibit menstruation and relieve the symptoms
procedure is invasive and may be embarrassing to some.
of endometriosis.
Other patients may be anxious about their medical condi-
Laparoscopy—A diagnostic procedure for endo- tion since endorectal ultrasounds are not routine. This
metriosis performed by inserting a slender, wand- places an added burden on already stressed hearts and
like instrument through a small incision in the nervous systems. Physicians, nurses, and technicians
woman’s abdomen. may need to be prepared for stressreactions that could
Menopause—The end of a woman’s menstrual include the heart,asthma,or anxious behaviors.
periods when the body stops making estrogen.
Retrograde menstruation—Menstrual flow that Description
travels into the body cavity rather than being
ERUS has been used as a means to determine the
expelled through the uterus.
depth of rectal cancers and to assess whether the tumor
has affected surrounding tissues. This pre-treatment pro-
cedure has proven to be an accurate tool for tailoring
The Endometriosis Sourcebook.Ed. Mary Lou Ballweg,et al. surgery for patients.
Chicago:Congdon & Weed,1995.
Problems with interpretation of the sonograms after
Overcoming Endometriosis.Ed. Mary Lou Ballweg,et al.
radiation and before surgery have resulted in tumors
Chicago:Congdon & Weed,1987.
being identified that were merely the formation of
ORGANIZATIONS fibrous tissues that remained after the tumors had been
Endometriosis Association International Headquarters. 8585 eliminated by the radiation. Yet, some of the fibrous
North 76th Place,Milwaukee,WI 53223. (800) 992-3636. areas actually hid residual tumors. Rectal anatomy itself
<http://EndometriosisAssn.org>.
can affect the accuracy of ultrasound reading. This
Stephanie Slon makes ERUS problematic in determining the amount of
tumor reduction a patient has after radiation therapy.
Endometritis seePelvic inflammatory disease
Preparation
The patient must evacuate the bowels completely
before the procedure is done. This usually is assisted
Endorectal ultrasound
though the use of several enemas. The patient may be
told to adhere to a liquid diet the day prior to doing this
Definition
procedure. The probe is inserted,usually with little dis-
Endorectal ultrasound (ERUS) is a procedure where comfort for the patient since it will only be examining
a probe is inserted into the rectum and high frequency the first few inches of the colon.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1195
Endorectal
ultrasound
<http://www.oncolink.upenn.edu/pdq_html/2/engl/20007
KEY TERMS 6.html>.
Janie F. Franz
Anal sphincter muscles—Muscles that control the
opening and closing of the anus.
Fistula—An abnormal passage.
Sonogram—The picture formed by the pattern of
echoes from an ultra sound. Endoscopic retrograde
Ultrasound waves—High frequency sound waves. cholangiopancreatography
Definition
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
Aftercare
(ERCP) is a technique in which a hollow tube called an
Since ERUS is a minor invasive procedure,there is endoscope is passed through the mouth and stomach to
no aftercare. the duodenum (the first part of the small intestine). This
procedure was developed to examine abnormalities of
the bile ducts, pancreas, and gallbladder. It was devel-
Risks
oped during the late 1960s and is used today to diagnose
There are no risks to having an ultrasound. and treat blockages of the bile and pancreatic ducts.
The term has three parts to its definition:
Normal results •endoscopic refers to the use of an endoscope
Normal results after an endorectal ultrasound are •retrograde refers to the injection of dye up into the bile
normal,healthy tissues. ducts in a direction opposing, or against, the normal
flow of bile down the ducts
Abnormal results •cholangiopancreatography means visualization of the
bile ducts (cholangio) and pancreas (pancreato)
Abnormal results range from any number of congen-
ital deformities in the lining of the rectum to serious rec-
Purpose
tal cancers.
Until the 1970s,methods to visualize the bile ducts
Resources produced images that were of relatively poor quality and
often misleading; in addition,the pancreatic duct could
BOOKS
not be examined at all. Patients with symptoms related to
Johnston,Lorraine. Colon and Rectal Cancer:A Comprehen-
the bile ducts or pancreatic ducts frequently needed
sive Guide for Patients and Families.Sebastopol,CA:
surgery to diagnose and treat their conditions.
O’Reilly,2000.
Levin,Bernard. Colorectal Cancer:A Thorough and Compas- Using ERCP,physicians can obtain high-quality x
sionate Resource for Patients and Their Families.New rays of these structures and identify areas of narrowing
York:Villard,1999. (strictures),cancers,and gallstones. This procedure can
help determine whether bile or pancreatic ducts are
PERIODICALS
blocked; it also identifies where they are blocked along
Gavioli,M. A. Bagni,I. Piccagli,S. Fundaro,and G. Natalini.
“Usefulness of Endorectal Ultrasound after Preoperative with the cause of the blockage. ERCP may then be used
Radiotherapy in Rectal Cancer:Comparison between to relieve the blockage. For patients requiring surgery or
Sonographic and Histopathologic Changes.”Dis Colon additional procedures for treatment,ERCP outlines the
Rectum(August 2000):1075-83. anatomical changes for the surgeon.
OTHER
American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons. “Practice Precautions
Parameters for the Treatment of Rectal Carcinoma.”9 May
The most important precaution is that the examina-
2001. <http://www.asco.org/prof/me/html/abstracts/
tion should be performed by an experienced physician.
gasc/m_969.htm>.
National Cancer Institute. “NCI/PDQ Patient Statement:Rectal The procedure is much more technically difficult than
Cancer Updated 11/2000.”OncoLink. 9 May 2001. many other gastrointestinal endoscopic studies. Patients
1196 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
yhpargotaercnapoignalohc
edargorter
cipocsodnE
should seek physicians with experience performing
ERCP. Patients should inform the physician about any KEY TERMS
allergies(including allergies to contrast dyes,iodine,or
shellfish),medication use,and medical problems. Occa- Endoscope, endoscopy—An endoscope used in the
sionally,patients may need to be admitted to the hospital field of gastroenterology is a hollow, thin, flexible
after the procedure. tube that uses a lens or miniature camera to view
various areas of the gastrointestinal tract. When the
Description procedure is performed to examine the bile ducts or
pancreas, the organs are not viewed directly, but After sedation, a specially adapted endoscope is
rather indirectly through the injection of contrast.
passed through the mouth,through the stomach,then into
The performance of an exam using an endoscope is
the duodenum. The opening to ducts that empty from the
referred to as endoscopy. Diagnosis through biop-
liver and pancreas is identified, and a plastic tube or
sies or other means and therapeutic procedures can
catheter is placed into the orifice (opening). Contrast dye
also be done using these instruments.
is then injected into the ducts,and with the assistance of
a radiologist,pictures are taken. Visualization—The process of making an internal
organ visible. A radiopaque substance is intro-
Preparation duced into the body, then an x-ray picture of the
desired area is taken.
The upper intestinal tract must be empty for the pro-
cedure,so patients should not eat or drink for at least six to
12 hours before the exam. Patients should ask the physi-
cian about taking their medications before the procedure.
ducts,measurements using x rays are taken to determine
if the ducts are too large (dilated) or too narrow (stric-
Aftercare tured). The ducts and gallbladder should be free of stones
Someone should be available to take the person or tumors.
home after the procedure and stay with them for a while;
patients will not be able to drive themselves because they
Abnormal results
undergo sedation during this test. Pain or any other
unusual symptoms should be reported to the physician. When areas in the pancreatic or bile ducts (including
those in the liver) are too wide or too narrow compared
with the standard,the test is considered abnormal. Once
Risks
these findings are demonstrated using ERCP,symptoms
ERCP-related complications can be broken down
are usually present; they generally do not change without
into those related to medications used during the proce-
treatment. Stones,identified as opaque or solid structures
dure, the diagnostic part of the procedure, and those
within the ducts,are also considered abnormal. Masses
related to endoscopic therapy. The overall complication
or tumors may also be seen,but sometimes the diagnosis
rate is 5–10%; most of those occur when diagnostic
is made not by direct visualization of the tumor,but by
ERCP is combined with a therapeutic procedure. During
indirect signs,such as a single narrowing of one of the
the exam, the endoscopist can cut or stretch structures
ducts. Overall,ERCP has an excellent record in diagnos-
(such as the muscle leading to the bile duct) to treat the
ing these abnormalities.
cause of the patient’s symptoms. Although the use of
sedatives carries a risk of decreasing cardiac and respira-
Resources
tory function,it is very difficult to perform these proce-
dures without these drugs. BOOKS
Ostroff,James W.,and Jeanne M. LaBerge. “Endoscopic and
The major complications related to diagnostic ERCP
Radiologic Treatment of Biliary Disease.”In Sleisenger &
are pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas) and
Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.Ed. by
cholangitis(inflammation of the bile ducts). Bacteremia
Mark Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W.B. Saunders Com-
(the passage of bacteria into the blood stream) and perfo-
pany,1997.
ration (hole in the intestinal tract) are additional risks.
PERIODICALS
Aliperti,Giuseppe. “Complications Related to Diagnostic and
Normal results
Therapeutic Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancre-
Because certain standards have been set for the nor- atography”Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Clinics of North
mal diameter or width of the pancreatic duct and bile America(Apr. 1996):379–407.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1197
Endoscopic
retrograde
cholangiopancreatography
Baillie,John. “Treatment of Acute Biliary Pancreatitis.”New The revolutionary technique made possible the
England Journal of Medicine336,no. 4 (1997):286. endoscopic removal of stones and stretching of areas of
Wigton,Robert S. “Measuring Procedural Skills.”Annals of narrowing (strictures). It has since been expanded to
Internal Medicine125 (1996):1003–4. include drainage of bile from blocked ducts and treat-
OTHER ment of various abnormalities of the pancreas.
Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography.21 June
2001 <http://www.asge.org>.
Precautions
Measuring Procedural Skills.21 June 2001 <http://www.
acponline.org/journals/annals/15dec96/procskil.htm>. The most important precaution related to both ERCP
Treatment of Acute Biliary Pancreatitis.21 June 2001 <http:// and ERS is to have the procedure performed by an expe-
content.nejm.org>. rienced physician. ERS is technically more difficult than
many other gastrointestinal endoscopic studies,including
David S. Kaminstein ERCP. Patients should inquire as to the physician’s expe-
rience with the procedure. The physician should also be
Endoscopic sclerotherapy see Sclerotherapy
informed of any allergies,medication use,and medical
for esophageal varices problems.
Description
ERS is generally performed only after ERCP has
Endoscopic sphincterotomy been successfully accomplished and detail of the anato-
my and abnormalities is known. During ERS,a number
Definition of various instruments are inserted through the endo-
scope in order to “cut”or stretch the sphincter. Once this
Endoscopic sphincterotomy or endoscopic retrograde
is done,additional instruments are passed that enable the
sphincterotomy (ERS) is a relatively new endoscopic
removal of stones and the stretching of narrowed regions
technique developed to examine and treat abnormalities
of the ducts. Drains (stents) can also be used to prevent a
of the bile ducts,pancreas and gallbladder. The procedure
narrowed area from rapidly returning to its previously
was developed as an extension to the diagnostic examina-
narrowed state.
tion,ERCP (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancre-
atography); with the addition of “sphincterotomy,”
Preparation
abnormalities found during the study could be treated at
the same time without the need for invasive surgery. The upper intestinal tract must be empty for the pro-
The term ERS has three parts to its definition; cedure,so patients must not eat or drink for at least six to
12 hours before the exam. Patients need to inquire about
•endoscopic refers to the use of an endoscope
taking their medications before the procedure. Some
•retrograde refers to the insertion of the endoscope up patients may require antibioticsbefore and/or after the
into the ducts in a direction opposite to or against the procedure. When possible, aspirin or NSAIDS should
normal flow of bile downthe ducts not be taken within several days before the procedure,
•sphincterotomy,which means cutting of the sphincter because they interfere with blood clotting.
or muscle that lies at the juncture of the intestine with
both the bile and pancreatic ducts Aftercare
When ERS is performed, physicians will usually
Purpose
want to observe the patient closely for several hours to
Until the 1970s,patients with symptoms related to ensure that there are no signs of complications. Painor
disease of the bile ducts or pancreas frequently needed any other unusual symptoms should be reported. Admis-
surgery to diagnose the cause and treat any abnormali- sion to the hospital may be advised.
ties. ERCP allowed physicians for the first time to obtain
high quality x rays of the common bile and pancreatic
Risks
ducts,and detect areas of narrowing (strictures),stones,
and tumors. ERCP was not initially designed for treat- ERS complications are related either to the drugs
ment. ERS was developed shortly after and enabled used during the procedure,or the results of dye injection
physicians to treat the abnormalities identified by the or cutting of tissue. The overall complication rate is
injection of dye and x rays. 5–10%. During the exam, the endoscopist can cut or
1198 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ymotoretcnihps
cipocsodnE
Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark
KEY TERMS Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Company.
1997.
Endoscope, Endoscopy—An endoscope as used in PERIODICALS
the field of gastroenterology is a thin flexible tube Aliperti,Giuseppe. “Complications Related to Diagnostic and
which uses a lens or miniature camera to view Therapeutic Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancre-
various areas of the gastrointestinal tract. When atography.”Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Clinics of North
America(Apr. 1996):379-407.
the procedure is performed to examine certain
Baillie,John. “Treatment of Acute Biliary Pancreatitis.”New
organs such as the bile ducts or pancreas, the
England Journal of Medicine336,no. 4 (1997):286.
organs are not viewed directly, but rather indirect-
Cotton,Peter B.,and Hawes,Robert H. “Therapeutic Biliary
ly through the injection of x-ray dye. The perfor-
Endoscopy.”Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Clinics of North
mance of an exam using an endoscope is referred
America(Jan. 1996):1-263.
by the general term endoscopy. Diagnosis through Wigton,Robert S. “Measuring Procedural Skills.”Annals of
biopsies or other means and therapeutic proce- Internal Medicine125 (1996):1003-1004.
dures can be done with these instruments.
OTHER
NSAIDS—This abbreviation stands for non- “Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography.”Ameri-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which are med- can Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy.<http://www.
ications such as Ibufprofen that are used to control asge.org>.
pain and inflammation. Most may be purchased “Treatment of Acute Biliary Pancreatitis.”New England Jour-
over the counter. One of their major side effects is nal of Medicine Online.<http://content.nejm.org>.
that they decrease the effect of the normal blood
clotting factors in blood. In patients undergoing David Kaminstein,MD
surgical or endoscopic procedures, this can lead
to an increased risk of bleeding.
Enemas
stretch structures (such as the muscle leading to the bile
Definition
duct) to treat the cause of the patient’s symptoms. Cut-
ting or stretching of these structures can sometimes cause An enema is the insertion of a solution into the rec-
a hole or perforation. The use of sedatives also carries a tum and lower intestine.
risk of decreasing cardiac and respiratory function,how-
ever,it is very difficult to perform these procedures with-
Purpose
out these drugs.
Enemas may be given for the following purposes:
Other major complications related to ERCP or ERS
•to remove feces when an individual is constipated or
are pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas) and
impacted,
cholangitis(inflammation of the bile ducts). Bacteremia
(the passage of bacteria into the blood stream) and bleed- •to remove feces and cleanse the rectum in preparation
ing are also risks. for an examination,
•to remove feces prior to a surgical procedure to prevent
Normal results contamination of the surgical area,
Certain standards have been set for the diameter or •to administer drugs or anesthetic agents.
width of the pancreatic and bile ducts. Measurements by
x ray are used to determine if the ducts are too large Precautions
(dilated) or too narrow (strictured). Lastly,the ducts and
The rectal tube used for infusion of the enema solu-
gallbladder should be free of any solid particles,such as
tion should be smooth and flexible to decrease the possi-
stones,and free of areas of narrowing.
bility of damage to the mucous membrane that lines the
rectum. Tap water is commonly used for adults but
Resources should not be used for infants because of the danger of
BOOKS electrolyte (substance that conducts electric current
Ostroff,James W.,and Jeanne M. Laberge. “Endoscopic and within the body and is essential for sustaining life)
Radiologic Treatment of Biliary Disease.”In Sleisenger & imbalance. The colon absorbs water, and repeated tap
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1199
Enemas
age and size of the person receiving the enema,however
general guidelines would be:
•Infant:250 cc or less
•Toddler and preschooler:500 cc or less
•School-aged child:500–1,000 cc
•Adult:750–1,000 cc
Some may differentiate between high and low ene-
mas. A high enema,given to cleanse as much of the large
bowel as possible,is usually administered at higher pres-
sure and with larger volume (1,000 cc),and the individ-
ual changes position several times in order for the fluid
to flow up into the bowel. A low enema, intended to
cleanse only the lower bowel,is administered at lower
pressure,using about 500 cc of fluid.
Oil retention enemas serve to lubricate the rectum
and lower bowel,and soften the stool. For adults,about
150–200 cc of oil is instilled, while in small children,
75–150 cc of oil is considered adequate. Salad oil or liq-
uid petrolatum are commonly used at a temperature of
91°F (32.8°C). There are also commercially prepared oil
retention enemas. The oil is usually retained for one to
three hours before it is expelled.
water enemas can cause cardiovascular overload and The rectal tube used for infusion of the solution,
electrolyte imbalance. Similarly,repeated saline enemas usually made of rubber or plastic, has two or more
can cause increased absorption of fluid and electrolytes openings at the end through which the solution can flow
into the bloodstream,resulting in overload. Individuals into the bowel. The distance to which the tube must be
receiving frequent enemas should be observed for over- inserted is dependent upon the age and size of the
load symptoms that include dizziness, sweating, or patient. For adult, insertion is usually 3–4 in (7.5–10
vomiting. cm); for children,approximately 2–3 in (5–7.5 cm); and
for infants,only 1–1.5 in (2.5–3.75 cm). The rectal tube
Soap suds and saline used for cleansing enemas can
is lubricated before insertion with a water soluble lubri-
cause irritation of the lining of the bowel,with repeated
cant to ease insertion and decrease irritation to the rec-
use or a solution that is too strong. Only white soap
tal tissues.
should be used; the bar should not have been previously
used,to prevent infusing undesirable organisms into the The higher the container of solution is placed, the
individual receiving the enema. Common household greater the force in which the fluid flows into the patient.
detergents are considered too strong for the rectum and Routinely,the container should be no higher than 12 in
bowel. The commercially prepared castile soap is pre- (30 cm) above the level of the bed; for a high cleansing
ferred, and should be used in concentration no greater enema,the container may be 12–18 in (30–45 cm) above
than 5 cc soap to 1,000 cc of water. the bed level,because the fluid is to be instilled higher
into the bowel.
Description
Preparation
Cleansing enemas act by stimulation of bowel activ-
ity through irritation of the lower bowel,and by disten- The solution used in the procedure is measured,
tion with the volume of fluid instilled. When the enema mixed,and warmed before administration of the enema.
is administered,the individual is usually lying on the left
side,which places the sigmoid colon (lower portion of
Aftercare
bowel) below the rectum and facilitates infusion of fluid.
The length of time it takes to administer an enema If necessary,a specimen will be collected for diag-
depends on the amount of fluid to be infused. The nostic evaluation. If the enema was given to alleviate
amount of fluid administered will vary depending on the constipation,the better approach to combatting consti-
1200 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
samenE
Colon Rectum
Enemas may be given for the following purposes:to remove
feces when an individual is constipated,or to remove feces
and cleanse the rectum in preparation for an examination,
or prior to surgery to prevent contamination.There are two
types of enemas:the high enema,given to cleanse the large
bowel,and the low enema,to cleanse only the lower bowel.
(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
more difficult by narrowing the urethra,a tube running
KEY TERMS from the bladder through the prostate gland. It can be
effectively treated by surgery and, today, by certain
Electrolyte—A substance that conducts electric drugs.
current within the body and is essential for sus-
taining life.
Description
Intestine—Also called the bowels and divided into
The common term for enlarged prostate is BPH,
large and small intestine, they extend from the
which stands for benign (non-cancerous) prostatic
stomach to the anus, where waste products exit the
hyperplasia or hypertrophy. Hyperplasia means that the
body. The small intestine is about 20 ft (6.1 m) long
prostate cells are dividing too rapidly, increasing the
and the large intestine, about 5 ft (1.5 m) long.
total number of cells, and, therefore, the size of the
Rectum—The portion of bowel just before the anus. organ itself. Hypertrophy simply means “enlargement.”
The prefix rectois used with a variety of words in BPH is part of the agingprocess. The actual changes in
relation to conditions that affect the rectum. the prostate may start as early as the 30s but take place
very gradually, so that significant enlargement and
symptoms usually do not appear until after age 50. Past
this age the chances of the prostate enlarging and caus-
pation in the future is with a high fiber diet (five to six ing urinary symptoms become progressively greater.
servings of whole grain foods) and adequate fluid More than 40% of men in their 70s have an enlarged
intake (seven to eight glasses of water per day). Regular prostate. Symptoms generally appear between ages
exercise and going to the bathroom when necessary 55–75. About 10% of all men eventually will require
will also help. If constipation is a chronic problem, treatment for BPH.
medical help should be consulted to determine if there
BPH has been viewed as a rare condition in African,
is underlying disorder.
Chinese and other Asian peoples for reasons that are not
clear.
Risks
Habitual use of enemas as a means to combat consti-
Causes and symptoms
pation can make the problem even more severe when
their use is discontinued. Enemas should be used only as The cause of BPH is a mystery, but age-related
a last resort for treatment of constipation and with a doc- changes in the levels of hormones circulating in the
tor’s recommendation. Enemas should not be adminis- blood may be a factor. Whatever the cause,an enlarging
tered to individuals who have recently had colon or rectal prostate gradually narrows the urethra and obstructs the
surgery,a heart attack,or who suffer from an unknown flow of urine. Even though the muscle in the bladder wall
abdominal condition or an irregular heartbeat. becomes stronger in an attempt to push urine through the
smaller urethra,in time,the bladder fails to empty com-
pletely at each urination. The urine that collects in the
Resources
bladder can become infected and lead to stone formation.
The kidneys themselves may be damaged by infection or
OTHER
Eller,D. “Spring Cleaning from the Inside Out.”RemedyMay/ by urine constantly “backing up.”
June 1997. 28 May 1998 <http://thriveonline.oxygen.com>. When the enlarging prostate gland narrows the ure-
Weiss,R. “Enhancing the process of elimination.”Washington
thra,a man will have increasing trouble starting the urine
Post Health.29 Nov. 1994. 28 May 1998 <http://thrive
stream. Because some urine remains behind in the blad-
online.oxygen.com>.
der,he will have to urinate more often,perhaps two or
Kathleen D. Wright,RN three times at night (nocturia). The need to urinate can
become very urgent and,in time,urine may dribble out
to stain a man’s clothing. Other symptoms of BPH are a
weak and sometimes a split stream and general aching or
Enlarged prostate painin the perineum (the area between the scrotum and
anus). Some men may have considerable enlargement of
Definition the prostate before even mild symptoms develop.
A non-cancerous condition that affects many men If a man must strain hard to force out the urine,
past 50 years of age,enlarged prostate makes urinating small veins in the bladder wall and urethra may rupture,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1201
Enlarged
prostate
causing blood to appear in the urine. If the urinary stream If digital or ultrasound examination of the prostate
becomes totally blocked,the urine collecting in the blad- raises the suspicion of cancer,most urologists will rec-
der may cause severe discomfort, a condition called ommend that a prostatic tissue biopsy be performed. This
acute urinary retention. Urine that stagnates in the blad- is usually done using a lance-like instrument that is
der can easily become infected. A burning feeling during inserted into the rectum. It pierces the rectal wall and,
urination and fever are clues that infection may have guided by the physcian’s finger, obtains six to eight
developed. Finally,if urine backs up long enough it may pieces of prostatic tissue that are sent to the laboratory
increase pressure in the kidneys,though this rarely caus- for microscopic examination. If cancer is present, the
es permanent kidney damage. prognosis and treatment are changed accordingly.
A catheter placed through the urethra and into the
Diagnosis bladder can show how much urine remains in the bladder
after the patient urinates—a measure of how severe the
When a man’s symptoms point to BPH, the first
obstruction is. Another and very simple test for obstruc-
thing the physician will want to do is a digital rectal
tion is to have the man urinate into a uroflowmeter,
examination, inserting a finger into the anus to feel
which measures the rate of urine flow. A very certain—
whether—and how much—the prostate is enlarged. A
though invasive—way of confirming obstruction from an
smooth prostate surface suggests BPH,whereas a dis-
enlarged prostate is to pass a special viewing instrument
tinct lump in the gland might mean prostate cancer.
called a cystoscope into the bladder,but this is not often
The next step is a blood test for a substance called
necessary.
prostate-specific antigen or PSA. Between 30–50% of
men with BPH have an elevated PSA level. This does It is routine to check a urine sample for an increased
not mean cancer by any means, but other measures number of white blood cells,which may mean there is
are needed to make sure that the prostate enlargement infection of the bladder or kidneys. The same sample
is in fact benign. An ultrasound exam of the prostate, may be cultured to show what type of bacterium is caus-
which is entirely safe and delivers no radiation, can ing the infection,and which antibioticswill work best.
show whether it is enlarged and may show that cancer The state of the kidneys may be checked in two ways:
is present. imaging by either ultrasound or injecting a dye (the intra-
1202 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
etatsorp
degralnE
Ureter Urine retention in bladder
Enlarged
prostate
gland
Prostate Constricted
gland urethra
Normal sized prostate gland Enlarged prostate gland
An enlarged prostate is a non-cancerous condition in which the narrowing of the urethra makes the elimination of urine more
difficult.It most often occurs in men over age 50.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
venous urogram,or pyelogram); or a blood test for crea-
tinine,which collects in the blood when the kidneys can- KEY TERMS
not eliminate it.
Catheter—A rubber or plastic tube placed through
Treatment the urethra into the bladder to remove excess
urine when the flow of urine is cut off, or to pre-
Drugs
vent urinary infection.
A class of drugs called alpha-adrenergic blockers, Creatinine—One of the “waste” substances nor-
which includes phenoxybenzamine and doxazosin,relax mally excreted by the kidneys into the urine.
the muscle tissue surrounding the bladder outlet and lin- When urine flow is slowed, creatinine may collect
ing the wall of the urethra to permit urine to flow more in the blood and cause toxic effects.
freely. These drugs improve obstructive symptoms,but do
Hyperplasia—A condition where cells, such as
not keep the prostate from enlarging. Other drugs (finas-
those making up the prostate gland, rapidly divide
teride is a good example) do shrink the prostate and may
abnormally and cause the organ to become
delay the need for surgery. Symptoms may not,however,
enlarged.
improve until the drug has been used for three months or
longer. Antibiotic drugs are given promptly whenever Hypertrophy—A technical term for enlargement,
infection is diagnosed. Some medications,including anti- as in BPH (benign prostatic hypertrophy).
histamines and some decongestants, can make the Urethra—In males, the tube that conducts urine
symptoms of BPH suddenly worse and even cause acute from the bladder through the penis to the outside
urinary retention,and therefore should be avoided. of the body. When narrowed by an enlarging
prostate, symptoms of BPH develop.
Intermediate treatments
Urinary retention—The result of progressive
When drugs have failed to control symptoms of obstruction of the urethra by an enlarging prostate,
BPH but the physician does not believe that conventional causing urine to remain in the bladder even after
surgery is yet needed, a procedure called transurethral urination.
needle ablation may be tried. In the office and using local
anesthesia, a needle is inserted into the prostate and
radiofrequency energy is applied to destroy the tissue
that is obstructing urine flow. Another new approach is
Alternatives to TUR,some only recently introduced,
microwave hyperthermia, using a device called the
include:
Prostatron to deliver microwave energy to the prostate
through a catheter. This procedure is done at an outpa- •Laser ablation of the prostate. Laser energy is applied
tient surgery center. to the prostate through a special fiber passed through a
cystoscope. The procedure is done in an operating
Surgery room,and several patients have retained urine postoper-
For many years the standard operation for BPH has atively.
been transurethral resection (TUR) of the prostate. Under
•Transurethral incision of the prostate. Less invasive
general or spinal anesthesia, a cystoscope is passed
than standard TUR, an incision is made through the
through the urethra and prostate tissue surrounding the
prostate to open up the part of the urethra passing
urethra is removed using either a cutting instrument or a
through it. This may work well in men whose prostate
heated wire loop. The small pieces of prostate tissue are
is not grossly enlarged.
washed out through the scope. No incision is needed for
TUR. There normally is some blood in the urine for a
•Transurethral vaporization. A small roller ball is used to
few days following the procedure. In a few men—less
break up and vaporize the obstructing prostatic tissue,
than 5% of all those having TUR—urine will continue to
rather than cutting it away as in standard TUR. This is
escape unintentionally. Other uncommon complications
equally successful but patients usually can leave the
include a temporary rise in blood pressure with mental
hospital within 24 hours,and there is less blood loss.
confusion,which is treated by giving salt solution. Impo-
tence—the inability to achieve lasting penile erections— •If the prostate is greatly enlarged—as is the case in
does occur,but probably in fewer than 10% of patients. A about 5–10% of those diagnosed,an incision is made to
narrowing or stricture rarely develops in the urethra,but perform an open prostatectomy,removing the entire
this can be treated fairly easily. gland under direct vision.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1203
Enlarged
prostate
Alternative treatment Entamoeba histolytica infection see
Amebiasis
An extract of the saw palmetto(Serenoa repensor
S. serrulata) has been shown to stop or decrease the Enteric fever see Typhoid fever
hyperplasia of the prostate. Symptoms of BPH will
Enterically transmitted non-A non-B see
improve after taking the herb for one to two months,but
continued use is recommended. Hepatitis E
Prognosis
In a man without symptoms whose prostate is
enlarged, it is hard to predict when urinary symptoms
will develop and how rapidly they will progress. For this Enterobacterial infections
reasons some specialists (urologists) advise a period of
Definition
“watchful waiting.”When BPH is treated by convention-
al TUR,there is a small risk of complications but,in the Enterobacterial infections are disorders of the diges-
great majority of men,urinary symptoms will be relieved tive tract and other organ systems produced by a group of
and their quality of life will be much enhanced. In the gram-negative,rod-shaped bacteria called Enterobacteri-
future,it is possible that the less invasive forms of surgi- aceae. Gram-negative means that the organisms do not
cal treatment will be increasingly used to achieve results retain the violet color of the dye used to make Gram
as good as those of the standard operation. It also is pos- stains. The most troublesome organism in this group is
sible that new medications will be developed that shrink Escherichia coli. Other enterobacteria are species of Sal-
the prostate and eliminate obstructive symptoms so that monella, Shigella, Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Serratia,
surgery can be avoided altogether. Proteus,and Yersinia.
Prevention
Description
Whether or not BPH is caused by hormonal changes
Enterobacterial infections can be produced by bacte-
in aging men, there is no known way of preventing it.
ria that normally live in the human digestive tract without
Once it does develop and symptoms are present that
causing serious disease,or by bacteria that enter from the
interfere seriously with the patient’s life,timely medical
outside. In many cases these infections are nosocomial,
or surgical treatment will reliably prevent symptoms
which means that they can be acquired in the hospital.
from getting worse. Also, if the condition is treated
Klebsiellaand Proteussometimes cause pneumonia,ear
before the prostate has become grossly enlarged,the risk
and sinus infections,and urinary tract infections. Enter-
of complications is minimal. One of the potentially most
obacter and Serratia often cause bacterial infection of
serious complications of BPH, urinary infection (and
the blood (bacteremia), particularly in patients with
possible infection of the kidneys),can be prevented by
weakened immune systems.
using a catheter to drain excess urine out of the bladder
so that it does not collect,stagnate,and become infected. Diarrhea caused by enterobacteria is a common
problem in the United States. It is estimated that each
person in the general population has an average of 1.5
Resources
episodes of diarrhea each year,with higher rates in chil-
BOOKS dren, institutionalized people, and Native Americans.
Rous,Stephen N. The Prostate Book:Sound Advice on Symptoms This type of enterobacterial infection can range from a
and Treatment.2nd ed. New York:W. W. Norton,1995.
minor nuisance to a life-threatening disorder,especially
Selmans,Sandra. Prostate:Questions You Have...Answers You
in infants,elderly persons,AIDSpatients,and malnour-
Need.Allentown,PA:People’s Medical Society,1996.
ished people. Enterobacterial infections are one of the
Walsh,Patrick C.,and Janet F. Worthington. The Prostate:A
two leading killers of children in developing countries.
Guide for Men and the Women Who Love Them.New
York:Warner Books,1997.
Causes and symptoms
ORGANIZATIONS
Prostate Health Council. American Foundation for Urologic
Causes
Disease. 1128 N. Charles St.,Baltimore,MD 21201.
(800) 242-AFUD. Enterobacterial infections in the digestive tract typi-
cally start when the organisms invade the mucous tissues
David A. Cramer,MD that line the digestive tract. They may be bacteria that are
1204 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoitcefni
lairetcaboretnE
already present in the stomach and intestines, or they sue or gangreneof the bowel. NEC is primarily a disease
may be transmitted by contaminated food and water. It is of prematurity; 60–80% of cases occur in high-risk
also possible for enterobacterial infections to spread by preterm infants. NEC is responsible for 2–5% of cases in
person-to-person contact. The usual incubation period is newborn intensive care units (NICU). Enterobacteriaceae
12–72 hours. that have been identified in infants with NEC include
Salmonella,E. coli,Klebsiella,and Enterobacter.
ESCHERICHIA COLIINFECTIONS. E. coliinfections
cause most of the enterobacterial infections in the United
States. The organisms are categorized according to Diagnosis
whether they are invasive or noninvasive. Noninvasive
Patient history
types of E. coliinclude what are called enteropathogenic
E. coli,or EPEC,and enterotoxigenic E. coli,or ETEC. The diagnosis of enterobacterial infections is com-
EPEC and ETEC types produce a bacterial poison (toxin) plicated by the fact that viruses, protozoa, and other
in the stomach that interacts with the digestive juices and types of bacteria can also cause diarrhea. In most cases
causes the patient to lose large amounts of water through of mild diarrhea,it is not critical to identify the organism
the intestines. because the disorder is self-limiting. Some groups of
patients,however,should have stool tests. They include:
The invasive types of E. coliare called enterohemor-
rhagic E. coli,or EHEC,and enteroinvasive E. coli,or •patients with bloody diarrhea,
EIEC. These subtypes invade the stomach tissues direct- •patients with watery diarrhea who have become dehy-
ly,causing tissue destruction and bloody stools. EHEC drated,
can produce complications leading to hemolytic-uremic
•patients with watery diarrhea that has lasted longer than
syndrome(HUS),a potentially fatal disorder marked by
three days without decreasing in amount,
the destruction of red blood cells and kidney failure.
EHEC has become a growing problem in the United •patients with disorders of the immune system.
States because of outbreaks caused by contaminated The patient history is useful for public health reasons
food. A particular type of EHEC known as O157:H7 has as well as helping the doctor determine what type of
been identified since 1982 in undercooked hamburgers, enterobacterium may be causing the infection. The doctor
unpasteurized milk,and apple juice. Between 2–7% of will ask about the frequency and appearance of the diar-
infections caused by O157:H7 develop into HUS. rhea as well as other digestive symptoms. If the patient is
nauseated and vomiting,the infection is more likely to be
Symptoms located in the small intestine. If the patient is running a
fever,a diagnosis of dysentery is more likely. The doctor
The symptoms of enterobacterial infections are
will also ask if anyone else in the patient’s family or
sometimes classified according to the type of diarrhea
workplace is sick. Some types of enterobacteriaceae are
they produce.
more likely to cause group outbreaks than others. Other
WATERY DIARRHEA. Patients infected with ETEC, questions include the patient’s food intake over the last
EPEC, some types of Salmonella, and some types of few days and whether he or she has recently traveled to
Shigelladevelop a watery diarrhea. These infections are countries with typhoid feveror choleraoutbreaks.
located in the small intestine,result from bacterial toxins
interacting with digestive juices,do not produce inflamma- Physical examination
tion,and do not usually need treatment with antibiotics.
The most important parts of the physical examina-
BLOODY DIARRHEA (DYSENTERY). Bloody diarrhea tionare checking for signs of severe fluid loss and exam-
is sometimes called dysentery. It is produced by EHEC, ining the abdomen to rule out typhoid fever. The doctor
EIEC,some types of Salmonella,some types of Shigella, will look at the inside of the patient’s mouth and evaluate
and Yersinia. In dysentery,the infection is located in the the skin for signs of dehydration. The presence of a skin
colon, cells and tissues are destroyed, inflammation is rash and an enlarged spleen suggests typhoid rather than a
present,and antibiotic therapy is usually required. bacterial infection. If the patient’s abdomen hurts when the
doctor examines it,a diagnosis of dysentery is more likely.
NECROTIZING ENTEROCOLITIS (NEC). Necrotizing
enterocolitis(NEC) is a disorder that begins in newborn
Laboratory tests
infants shortly after birth. Although NEC is not yet fully
understood,it is thought that it results from a bacterial or The most common test that is used to identify the
viral invasion of damaged intestinal tissues. The disease cause of diarrhea is the stool test. Examining a stool sam-
organisms then cause the death(necrosis) of bowel tis- ple under a microscope can help to rule out parasitic and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1205
Enterobacterial
infections
protozoal infections. Routine stool cultures, however,
cannot be used to identify any of the four types of E. coli KEY TERMS
that cause intestinal infections. ETEC,EPEC,and EIEC
are unusual in the United States and can usually be iden- Dysentery—A type of diarrhea caused by infec-
tified only by specialists in research laboratories. tion and characterized by mucus and blood in the
Because of concern about EHEC outbreaks, however, stools.
most laboratories in the United States can now screen for
Empirical treatment—Medical treatment that is
O157:H7 with a test that identifies its characteristic
given on the basis of the doctor’s observations and
toxin. All patients with bloody diarrhea should have a
experience.
stool sample tested for E. coliO157:H7.
Escherichia coli—A type of enterobacterium that
is responsible for most cases of severe bacterial
Treatment
diarrhea in the United States.
The initial treatment of enterobacterial diarrhea is Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS)—A potential-
usually empiric. Empiric means that the doctor treats the ly fatal complication of E.coliinfections character-
patient on the basis of the visible symptoms and profes- ized by kidney failure and destruction of red blood
sional experience in treating infections,without waiting cells.
for laboratory test results. Since the results of stool cul-
Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC)—A disorder in
tures can take as long as two days,it is important to pre-
newborns caused by bacterial or viral invasion of
vent dehydration. The patient will be given fluids to
vulnerable intestinal tissues.
restore the electrolyte balance and paregoric to relieve
abdominal cramping. Nosocomial infections—Infections acquired in
hospitals.
Newborn infants and patients with immune system
disorders will be given antibiotics intravenously once the Toxin—A poison produced by certain types of
organism has been identified. Gentamicin,tobramycin, bacteria.
and amikacin are being used more frequently to treat
enterobacterial infections because many of the organisms
are becoming resistant to ampicillin and cephalosporin
antibiotics. Prognosis
The prognosis for most enterobacterial infections is
Alternative treatment good; most patients recover in about a week or 10 days
without needing antibiotics. HUS,on the other hand,has
Alternative treatments for diarrhea are intended to
a mortality rate of 3–5% even with intensive care. About
relieve the discomfort of abdominal cramping. Most
a third of the survivors have long-term problems with
alternative practitioners advise consulting a medical doc-
kidney function, and another 8% develop high blood
tor if the patient has sunken eyes,dry eyes or mouth,or
pressure,seizure disorders,and blindness.
other signs of dehydration.
Prevention
Herbal medicine
The World Health Organization (WHO) offers the
Herbalists may recommend cloves taken as an infu-
following suggestions for preventing enterobacterial
sion or ginger given in drop doses to control intestinal
infections,including E. coliO157:H7 dysentery:
cramps,eliminate gas,and prevent vomiting. Peppermint
(Mentha piperita) or chamomile (Matricaria recutita) •Cook ground beef or hamburgers until the meat is thor-
tea may also ease cramps and intestinal spasms. oughly done. Juices from the meat should be complete-
ly clear, not pink or red. All parts of the meat should
reach a temperature of 70°C (158°F) or higher.
Homeopathy
•Do not drink unpasteurized milk or use products made
Homeopathic practitioners frequently recommend
from raw milk.
Arsenicum albumfor diarrhea caused by contaminated
•Wash hands thoroughly and frequently,especially after
food,and Belladonnafor diarrhea that comes on sudden-
using the toilet.
ly with mucus in the stools. Veratrum album would be
given for watery diarrhea,and Podophyllumfor diarrhea •Wash fruits and vegetables carefully, or peel them.
with few other symptoms. Keep all kitchen surfaces and serving utensils clean.
1206 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoitcefni
lairetcaboretnE
•If drinking water is not known to be safe, boil it or
drink bottled water.
•Keep cooked foods separate from raw foods,and avoid
touching cooked foods with knives or other utensils that
have been used with raw meat.
Resources
BOOKS
Bennish,Michael L.,and Carlos Seas. “Bacterial Diarrheas.”
In Current Diagnosis.Vol. 9. Ed. Rex B. Conn,et al.
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
“Escherichia coli and Other Enterobacteriaceae Infections.”In
Professional Guide to Diseases,ed. Stanley Loeb,et al.
Springhouse,PA:Springhouse Corporation,1991.
“Infectious Disease:Enterobacteriaceae Infections.”In The
Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.16th ed. Ed.
Robert Berkow. Rahway,NJ:Merck Research Laborato-
ries,1992.
Description
“Necrotizing Enterocolitis.”In Neonatology:Management,
Procedures,On-Call Problems,Diseases and Drugs,ed. Enterobiasis is also called seatworm infection or
Tricia Lacy Gomella,et al. Norwalk,CT:Appleton & oxyuriasis. In the United States,enterobiasis is the most
Lange,1994.
common worm infection,and some estimate that approx-
Ogle,John W. “Infections:Bacterial & Spirochetal.”In Current
imately 10% of the United States population is infected.
Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment,ed. William W. Hay Jr.,
Worldwide,approximately 200 million people are infect-
et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997.
ed. Enterobiasis can affect people of any age,but is most
ORGANIZATIONS common among children ages 5–14 and particularly
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., affects those in the daycare setting.
NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435,(404) 639-3311.
<http://www.cdc.gov>.
Causes and symptoms
OTHER
“Escherichia coli O157:H7.”World Health Organization.7 The disease is highly contagious and is caused by a
June 1998 <http://www.who.int/home-page/index.en. parasitic worm called Enterobius vermicularis. The adult
shtml>. female worm is about the size of a staple (approximately
“Escherichia coli O157:H7.”Medscape Today7 June 1998 0.4 in [1 cm] long and 0.02 in [0.5 mm] wide) and has a
<http://www.medscape.com/Home/Topics/multispecialty/ pointed tip. The disease is transmitted by ingesting the
multispecialty.html>. eggs of the pinworm. These eggs travel to the small intes-
“Preventing foodborne illness.”Centers for Disease Control.7
tine where, after approximately one month, they hatch
June 1998 <http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/diseaseinfo/
and mature into adult worms. During the night, the
escherichiacoli_g.htm>.
female adult worms travel to the area around the anus
and deposit eggs in the folds of the anal area. A single
Rebecca J. Frey
female pinworm can lay 10,000 eggs and, after laying
eggs, dies. The eggs are capable of causing infection
after six hours at body temperature.
Significant itching in the anal region is caused by the
movement of the adult worm as the eggs are deposited.
Enterobiasis
When an individual scratches the anal region,the tiny eggs
get under the finger nails and in the underwear and night
Definition
clothes. Anything the individual touches with the contami-
Enterobiasis,or pinworm infection as it is common- nated fingers,for example,toys,bedding,blankets,bath-
ly called,is an intestinal infection caused by the parasitic room door knobs,or sinks,becomes contaminated. The
roundworm called Enterobius vermicularis. The most eggs are very hardy and can live on surfaces for two to
common symptom of this irritating,but not particularly three weeks. Anyone touching these contaminated sur-
dangerous,disease is itchingaround the anal area. faces can ingest the eggs and become infected. An individ-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1207
Enterobiasis
The pinworm of the genus Enterobiuspictured above is the
source of this infestation occurring in children.(Photo
Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
slide. When under a microscope in the laboratory, the
KEY TERMS eggs will be clearly visible.
Anus—The opening through which feces are elim- Treatment
inated.
In order to treat the disease, either mebendazole
Hemorrhoid—An area around the anus where
(Vermox) or pyrantel pamoate (Pin-X) will be given in
veins become dilated and the tissue swells, caus-
two oral doses spaced two weeks apart. These medica-
ing itching and pain.
tions eradicate the infection in approximately 90% of
Rectum—The end of the large intestine in which cases. Re-infection is common and several treatments
feces collects for elimination through the anus. may be required. Because the infection is easily spread
Vaginitis—Inflammation of the vagina. through contact with contaminated clothing or surfaces,
it is recommended that all family members receive the
therapeutic dose. Sometimes a series of six treatments
are given,each spaced two weeks apart. If family mem-
bers continue to be infected,a source outside the house
ual can also become infected by inhaling and swallowing
may be responsible.
the eggs,for example,when the bedcovers are shaken.
To relieve the rectal itching, a shallow warm bath
Many individuals with enterobiasis exhibit no symp-
with either half a cup of table salt,or Epsom salts is rec-
toms. When present,however,symptoms of the infection
ommended. Also,application of an ointment containing
begin approximately two weeks after ingesting the pin-
zinc oxide or regular petroleum jelly can be used to
worm eggs. The main symptom is itching around the
relieve rectal itching.
anus. Because the itching intensifies at night,when the
female worms comes to the anus to lay eggs, it often
leads to disrupted sleep and irritability. Poor sleeping at Prognosis
night in small children can be related to pinworms. Occa-
Pinworms cause little damage and can be easily erad-
sionally,the itching causes some bleeding and bruising
icated with proper treatment. Full recovery is expected.
in the region, and secondary bacterial infections can
occur. In females,the itching may spread to the vagina
and sometimes causes an infection of the vaginal region Prevention
(vaginitis). Enterobiasis usually lasts one to two months.
The disease can be prevented by treating all the
infected cases and thus eliminating the source of infec-
Diagnosis tion. Some ways to keep from catching or spreading the
disease include the following recommendations:
First,a physician will rule out other potential causes
•wash hands thoroughly before handling food and eating
of the itching, such as hemorrhoids, lice, or fungal or
bacterial infection. Once these have been ruled out, an •keep finger nails short and clean
accurate diagnosis of enterobiasis will require that either
•avoiding scratching the anal area
the eggs or the adult worms are detected. Rarely,the adult
•take early morning showers to wash away eggs deposit-
worms are seen as thin,yellowish-white threads,about
ed overnight
0.4 in (1 cm) long, in the stools of the infected person.
Usually,an hour or so after the individual goes to sleep, •once the infection has been identified,and treatment is
the adult female worms may be seen moving around lay- started,change the bed linen,night clothes,and under-
ing eggs if a flashlight is shone at the rectal area. wear daily
An easier method is to observe the eggs under the •machine wash linens in hot water and dry with heat to
microscope. In order to collect a specimen for laboratory kill any eggs
diagnosis, the physician may provide a paddle with a
•open the blinds or curtains since eggs are sensitive to
sticky adhesive on one side, or an individual may be
sunlight
instructed to place a piece of shiny cellophane tape sticky
side down against the anal opening. The best time to per-
form this test is at night or as soon as the individual Resources
wakes up in the morning,before having a bowel move- BOOKS
ment or taking a bath or shower. The pinworm eggs will Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
stick to the tape,which can then be placed on a specimen Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
1208 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisaiboretnE
Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.16th ed. Ed. Robert The most common disorders requiring permanent
Berkow,et al. Rahway,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories, ileostomy are Crohn’s disease,familial polyposis,and
1992. ulcerative colitis. Familial polyposis and ulcerative
Zinsser,Hans. Zinsser Microbiology.19th ed. Ed. Wolfgang K. colitis are serious health risks because they can develop
Joklik,et al. Stamford:Appleton Lange,1988.
into cancer.
•Treatment of advanced cancer or other causes of intesti-
Lata Cherath,PhD
nal obstruction.
Enterohemorrhagic E.coli see Escherichia
coli Precautions
Enterostomies are usually performed only as emer-
gency treatments for traumatic injuries in the abdomen or
as final measures for serious disorders of the intestines.
Most patients do not refuse to have the operation per-
Enterostomy
formed when the need for it is explained to them. A small
Definition minority, however, refuse enterostomies because of
strong psychological reactions to personal disfigurement
An enterostomy is an operation in which the surgeon
and the need to relearn bowel habits.
makes a passage into the patient’s small intestine through
the abdomen with an opening to allow for drainage or to
insert a tube for feeding. The opening is called a stoma, Description
from the Greek word for mouth. Enterostomies may be
Ileostomy
either temporary or permanent. They are classified accord-
ing to the part of the intestine that is used to create the Ileostomies represent about 25% of enterostomies.
stoma. If the ileum,which is the lowest of the three sec- They are performed after the surgeon removes a diseased
tions of the small intestine,is used to make the stoma,the colon and sometimes the rectum as well. The most com-
operation is called an ileostomy. If the jejunum,which is mon ileostomy is called a Brooke ileostomy after the
the middle section of the small intestine,is used,the oper- English surgeon who developed it. In a Brooke ileosto-
ation is called a jejunostomy. Some people use the word my,the surgeon makes the stoma in the lower right sec-
ostomyas a word that covers all types of enterostomies. tion of the abdomen. The ileum is pulled through an
opening (incision) in the muscle layer. The surgeon then
turns the cut end of the intestine inside out and sews it to
Purpose
the edges of the hole. He or she then positions an appli-
Enterostomies are performed in order to create a ance for collecting the fecal material. The appliance con-
new opening for the passage of fecal matter when normal sists of a plastic bag that fits over the stoma and lies flat
intestinal functioning is interrupted or when diseases of against the abdomen. The patient is taught to drain the
the intestines cannot be treated by medications or less bag from time to time during the day. Ileostomies need to
radical surgery. Some situations that may require entero- be emptied frequently because the digested food contains
stomies include: large amounts of water. Shortly after the operation,the
ileostomy produces 1–2 qt (0.9–1.91) of fluid per day;
•Healing of inflamed bowel segments. Enterostomies
after a month or two of adjustment,the volume decreases
performed for this reason are usually temporary.
to 1–2 pt (0.5–0.9)per day.
•Emergency treatment of gunshot or other penetrating
woundsof the abdomen. An enterostomy is needed to KOCK POUCH (CONTINENT ILEOSTOMY). The Kock
pouch is a variation of the basic ileostomy and is named
prevent the contents of the intestine from causing a seri-
for its Swedish inventor. In the Kock technique,the sur-
ous inflammation of the inside of the abdominal cavity
geon forms a pouch inside the abdominal cavity behind
(peritonitis). These enterostomies are also often tem-
the stoma that collects the fecal material. The stoma is
porary.
shaped into a valve to prevent fluid from leaking onto the
•Placement of a tube for enteral feeding. Enteral feeding
patient’s abdomen. The patient then empties the pouch
is a method for conveying nutritional solutions directly
several times daily by inserting a tube (catheter) through
into the stomach or jejunum through a tube. Tube
the valve. The Kock technique is sometimes called a con-
enterostomies may be long-term but are not permanent.
tinent ileostomy because the fluid is contained inside the
•Removal of diseased sections of the intestines. abdomen. It is successful in 70–90% of patients who
Ileostomies performed for this reason are permanent. have it done.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1209
Enterostomy
KEY TERMS
Crohn’s disease—A disease of the intestines that Ileum—The third segment of the small intestine,
causes inflammation leading to scarring, thickening connecting the jejunum and the large intestine.
of the walls of the intestine, and eventual obstruc-
Jejunum—The second of the three segments of the
tion.
small intestine, connecting the duodenum and the
ileum.
Duodenum—The first of the three segments of the
small intestine. The duodenum connects the stom- Kock pouch—A type of ileostomy in which the sur-
ach and the jejunum. geon forms an artificial rectum from a section of the
ileum. A Kock pouch is sometimes called a conti-
Enteral nutrition—A technique for feeding patients nent ileostomy because it is drained with a tube.
with liquid formulas conveyed directly into the
Ostomy—A common term for all types of enteros-
stomach or jejunum through tubes.
tomies.
Enterostomal therapist (ET)—A specialized coun- Stoma—The surgically constructed mouth or pas-
selor, usually a registered nurse, who provides osto- sage between the intestine and the outside of the
my patients with education and counseling before patient’s body.
the operation. After surgery, the ET helps the patient
Tube enterostomy—An enterostomy performed to
learn to take care of the stoma and appliance, and
allow the insertion of a feeding tube into the
offers long-term emotional support.
jejunum or stomach.
Familial polyposis—A disease that runs in families Ulcerative colitis—A disease of the colon charac-
in which lumps of tissue (polyps) form inside the terized by inflammation of the mucous lining,
colon. Familial polyposis may develop into cancer. ulcerated areas of tissue, and bloody diarrhea.
Jejunostomy Patient education
A jejunostomy is similar to an ileostomy except that If the patient is going to have a permanent ileosto-
the stoma is placed in the second section of the small my,the doctor will explain what will happen during the
intestine rather than the third. Jejunostomies are per- operation and why it is necessary. Most patients are will-
formed less frequently than ileostomies. They are almost ing to accept an ostomyas an alternative to the chronic
always temporary procedures. painand diarrheaof ulcerative colitis or the risk of can-
cer from other intestinal disorders. The patient can also
meet with an enterostomal therapist (ET) or a member of
Tube enterostomies the United Ostomy Association,which is a support group
for people with ostomies.
Tube enterostomies are operations in which the sur-
geon makes a stoma into the stomach itself or the
jejunum in order to insert a tube for liquid nutrients. Medical preparation
Tube enterostomies are performed in patients who need
The patient is prepared for surgery with an evalua-
tube feeding for longer than six weeks,or who have had
tion of his or her nutritional status, possible need for
recent mouth or nose surgery. As long as the patient’s
blood transfusions, and antibiotics if necessary. If the
intestinal tract can function,tube feedingsare consid-
patient does not have an intestinal obstruction or severe
ered preferable to intravenous feeding. Enteral nutrition
inflammation,he or she may be given a large quantity of
is safer than intravenous fluids and helps to keep the
a polyethylene glycol (PEG) solution to cleanse the
patient’s digestive tract functioning.
intestines before surgery.
Preparation Aftercare
Preoperative preparation includes both patient edu- Aftercare of an enterostomy is both psychological
cation and physical preparation. and medical.
1210 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ymotsoretnE
Medical aftercare and consider themselves to be in good health. Many
ileostomy patients enjoy being able to eat a full range of
If the enterostomy is temporary,aftercare consists of
foods rather than living on a restricted diet. Some
the usual monitoring of surgical wounds for infection or
patients,however,need to be referred to psychotherapists
bleeding. If the patient has had a permanent ileostomy,
to deal with depression or other emotional problems after
aftercare includes learning to use the appliance or empty
the operation.
the Kock pouch; learning to keep the stoma clean; and
readjusting bathroom habits. Recovery takes a long time
because major surgery is a shockto the system and the Resources
intestines take several days to resume normal function- BOOKS
ing. The patient’s fluid intake and output will be checked Altman,Roberta,and Michael J. Sarg. The Cancer Dictionary.
frequently to minimize the risk of dehydration. New York:Facts On File,Inc.,1992.
Baron,Robert B. “Nutrition.”In Current Medical Diagnosis
Patient education and Treatment,1998.37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al.
Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997.
Ileostomy patients must learn to watch their fluid and “Bowel Surgery with Ostomy.”In Everything You Need to
salt intake. They are at greater risk of becoming dehydrat- Know about Medical Treatments,ed. Matthew Cahill,et
ed in hot weather, from exercise, or from diarrhea. In al. Springhouse,PA:Springhouse Corporation,1996.
some cases they may need extra bananas or orange juice “Nutritional Management of the Surgical Patient:Determining
in the diet to keep up the level of potassium in the blood. the Route of Nutritional Support.”In Surgery On Call,ed.
Leonard G. Gomella and Alan T. Lefor. Stamford:Apple-
Patient education includes social concerns as well as ton & Lange,1996.
physical self-care. Many ileostomy patients are worried Schrock,Theodore R. “Large Intestine.”In Current Surgical
about the effects of the operation on their close relationships Diagnosis and Treatment. 10th ed. Ed. Lawrence W. Way.
and employment. If the patient has not seen an ET before Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1994.
the operation,the aftercare period is a good time to find out Smith,Roger. “Ileostomy and Colostomy.”In Magill’s Medical
about self-help and support groups. The ET can also evalu- Guide:Health and Illness,Supplement.Vol. 5. Ed. Nancy
A. Piotrowski. Pasadena,CA:Salem Press,Inc.,1996.
ate the patient’s emotional reactions to the ostomy.
ORGANIZATIONS
United Ostomy Association,Inc. (UOA). 19772 MacArthur
Risks
Blvd.,Suite 200,Irvine,CA 92612-2405. (800) 826-0826.
Enterostomies are not considered high-risk opera- <http://www.uoa.org>.
tions by themselves. About 40% of ileostomy patients
Rebecca J. Frey
have complications afterward, however; about 15%
require minor surgical corrections. Possible complica-
tions include:
•skin irritation caused by leakage of digestive fluids onto
the skin around the stoma,irritation is the most com- Enterovirus infections
mon complication of ileostomies
Definition
•diarrhea
•the development of abscesses Enteroviruses are so named because they reproduce
initially in the gastrointestinal tract after infection occurs.
•gallstones or stones in the urinary tract
Despite,this,they usually do not lead to intestinal symp-
•inflammation of the ileum toms; rather it is their spread to organs,such as the nervous
system, heart, skin, and others that causes disease.
•odors (can often be prevented by a change in diet)
Enteroviruses are part of a larger group of viruses known as
•intestinal obstruction
Picornaviruses. The word comes from the combination of
•a section of the bowel pushing out of the body (pro- “pico”(Spanish,meaning “a little bit”),and RNA (ribonu-
lapse) cleic acid,an important component of genetic material).
Normal results Description
Normal results include recovery from the surgery There are four groups of enteroviruses: Coxsack-
with few or no complications. About 95% of people with ievirus, Echovirus, ungrouped Enterovirus, and Y
ostomies recover completely,are able to return to work, Poliovirus.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1211
Enterovirus
infections
Viruses are generally divided into those that use •Aseptic meningitis encephalitisis a well known syn-
DNA (desoxyribonucleic acid) or RNA as their genetic drome caused by this group of viruses. In fact,
material; all enteroviruses are RNA viruses. They are enteroviruses are responsible for over 90% of cases of
found worldwide,but infection is more common in areas aseptic meningitis, and most often hits children and
of poor hygiene and overcrowding. young adults. Headache,fever,avoidance of light,and
eye painare characteristic. Drowsiness may be promi-
Although most cases of enterovirus do not produce
nent,and other symptoms include sore throat,cough,
symptoms,some five to 10 million individuals in the Unit-
muscle pain, and rash. Occasionally, not only the
ed States each year suffer from one of the enteroviral dis-
meninges—the covering around the brain and spinal
eases. Illness is more common in the very young. While
cord— is infected,but also brain tissue itself,produc-
there are close to seventy different strains of enteroviruses,
ing encephalitis. The illness resolves after about a week
over 70% of infections are caused by only 10 types.
or so,and permanent damage is unusual. Enteroviruses
The virus is most commonly transmitted by the can also produce the Guillian-Barré syndrome,which
fecal-oral route (contamination of fingers or objects by involves weakness and paralysisof the extremities and
human waste material); in some instances transmission is even the muscles of respiration.
through contaminated food or water. Passage of some
•Pleurodynia (Bornholm’s disease) is due to viral infec-
strains of virus by way of air droplets can lead to respira-
tion and inflammation of the chest and abdominal mus-
tory illness. Infection of fetuses by way of the placenta
cles used for breathing. Pain occurs as acute episodes,
has also been documented. Breast milk contains antibod-
lasting 30 minutes or so. Coxsackie B virus is the usual
ies which can protect newborns.
cause of the illness.
The incubation period for most enteroviruses ranges
•Myocarditis and/or pericarditisinvolves infection of
from two to 14 days. In areas of temperate climate,infec-
the heart muscle (myocardium) and the covering
tions occur mainly in the summer and fall.
around the heart (pericardium). Infants and young
adults are the most susceptible, and for some reason,
over two-thirds of cases occur in males. The disease
Causes and symptoms
usually begins as an upper respiratory tract infection
Enteroviruses are believed to be the cause of at least with cough,shortness of breath,and fever. Chest pain,
10 distinct illnesses. Once they enter the body,they mul- increasing shortness of breath,irregularities of cardiac
tiply in the cells that line the gastrointestinal tract,and rhythm, and heart failure sometimes develop. Some
eventually reach sites of lymphatic tissue (such as the patients wind up with long term heart failure if the heart
tonsils). While most of these diseases are of short dura- muscle is significantly affected.
tion and do not cause significant injury,some can pro-
•Exanthems is the medical term for rashes, and
duce severe illness.
enterovirus is the number one cause of summer and fall
The main syndromes caused by the various entero- rashes in children. They occur anywhere on the body,
viruses are the following: and often resemble diseases such as measles.
•Hand-foot-and-mouth disease occurs initially as a sore
•Summer grippe (nonspecific febrile illness). This is the
throat (often involving the tongue as well),and is fol-
most common syndrome,and is characterized by flu-
lowed by a rash on the hands,and sometimes the feet.
like symptoms of fever,headache,and weakness,that
The rash often forms small blisters, which lead to
typically last three to four days. Many patients also
ulcers. Symptoms generally resolve within a week. A
develop upper respiratory symptoms and some nausea
specific Coxsackievirus (A16) is the most frequent
and vomiting. One of the major ways to distinguish
cause of this highly infectious disease.
this disease from influenza,is the fact that grippe most
often occurs in the summer. •Herpangina is most often caused by one of the Cox-
sackie A viruses,and appears as the acute onset of fever
•Generalized disease of the newborn is a potentially
and sore throat. This last symptom is particularly
serious infection in which infants from one week to
severe, as the virus produces multiple ulcers in the
three months of age develop a syndrome that can be
throat. Swallowing becomes very painful; symptoms
difficult to distinguish from a severe bacterial infection.
can persist for several weeks.
Fever, irritability, and decreased responsiveness or
excessive sleepiness are the major symptoms. Inflam- •Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitisinvolves viral infec-
mation of heart muscle (myocarditis),low blood pres- tion of the conjunctiva,which is a covering around the
sure,hepatitis,and meningitissometimes complicate eye. Pain,blurred vision,aversion to light,and a dis-
the illness. charge from the eye are the main symptoms. Headache
1212 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoitcefni
surivoretnE
and fever occur in about one in five patients. The dis-
ease runs its course in about 10 days. KEY TERMS
A number of other illnesses have been attributed to
enteroviruses,including pneumoniaand other respirato- Antibodies—Proteins that are formed by the body
ry infections,myositis or muscle inflammation,arthritis, and play a role in defense against infection.
and acute inflammation of the kidneys. It is clear then Antibiotic—A medication that is designed to kill
that these viruses produce a number of various illnesses, or weaken bacteria.
most often in younger age groups.
Meninges—Outer covering of the spinal cord and
brain. Infection is called meningitis, which can
Diagnosis lead to damage to the brain or spinal cord and
lead to death.
In the majority of cases, diagnosis is based on the
characteristic symptoms that the virus produces (such as
the chest pain in pleurodynia). Rarely is it necessary to
identify a specific strain of virus causing the illness. It is
that affect antibody production can develop chronic
more important to be certain that the infection is due to a
infection of the brain or meninges.
virus which does not require treatment with antibiotics.
Culture,or growing the organism outside of the body,
Prevention
is helpful only when obtained from areas that tend to indi-
cate recent infection,such as from swollen joints,cere- In the hospital setting, the best means of avoiding
brospinal fluid,or blood. Cultures from other areas,such transmission of infection is the use of good hand-wash-
as the throat,can be misleading. This is because the virus ing practices and other appropriate precautions (gowns
may remain for long periods of time in places with a large and gloves for hospital staff). The virus is found in feces
amount of lymphatic tissue. As a rule,cultures done early for up to one week after infection; therefore precautions
in the illness are more likely to identify the virus. that isolate waste material (enteric precautions) will help
decrease the chance of spreading the illness.
New techniques that involve identification of viral
genetic material (PCR) are useful in certain cases,but are
not indicated for routine testing. Resources
BOOKS
Cohen,Jeffrey I. “Enteroviruses and Reoviruses.”In Harri-
Treatment
son’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S.
As noted above,enterovirus is capable of attacking Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
many different organs and producing a variety of symp-
PERIODICALS
toms. Most infections are mild and improve without McKenna,W. J.,and M. J. Davies. “Immunosuppression for
complications,and require no specific therapy. When the Myocarditis.”New England Journal of Medicine333,no.
virus attacks critical organs however,such as the heart, 5 (1995):312.
respiratory muscles,nervous system,etc.,then special- Venditti Jr,F. J.,and J. T. Fallon. “MGH Case Records (Case
ized care is often needed. 47-1993):A 28-year-old Man with Recurrent Ventricular
Tachycardia and Fysfunction of Multiple Organs- Case
As of 2001, no effective antiviral medication for
Records of the Massachusetts General Hospital.”New
enterovirus has undergone investigation in patients, England Journal of Medicine329,no.22 (1993):1639.
though some drugs appear promising for the future. In
OTHER
some patients who are unable to produce antibodies
“Hand,Foot and Mouth Disease.”The Picarnovirus Home
(hypogammaglobunemia), administrating antibodies
Page.<http://www.iah.bbsrc.ac.uk/virus/Picornaviridae/
themselves is helpful.
picornavirus.htm>.
“Weekly Clinicopathological Exercises:Case 47- 1993:A 28-
Year-Old Man with Recurrent Ventricular Tachycardia and
Prognosis
Dysfunction of Multiple Organs.”New England Journal
The overall outlook for enterovirus infection of Medicine Online.<http://content.nejm.org>.
depends on the organs involved,and the immune condi-
tion of the individual patient. Unless vital organs are David Kaminstein,MD
involved or immunity is abnormal,infection causes few
problems. On the other hand,patients who have diseases Entropy see Eyelid disorders
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1213
Enterovirus
infections
Enuresis see Bed-wetting •constipation
•diarrhea
Environmental medicine see Wilderness
medicine •food allergies
•gastritis
•gastric duodenal ulcer
•gout
Enzyme therapy •headaches
•hepatitis
Definition
•hypoglycemia
Enyzme therapy is a plan of dietary supplements of
plant and animal enzymes used to facilitate the digestive •infections
process and improve the body’s ability to maintain bal- •mucous congestion
anced metabolism.
•multiple sclerosis
•nervous disorders
Purpose
•nutritional disorders
In traditional medicine, enzyme supplements are
often prescribed for patients suffering from disorders •obesity
that affect the digestive process, such as cystic
•premenstrual syndrome (PMS)
fibrosis,Gaucher’s disease,and celiac disease. A pro-
gram of enzyme supplementation is rarely recommend- •stress
ed for healthy patients. However, proponents of
enzyme therapy believe that such a program is benefi- Description
cial for everyone. They point to enzymes’ ability to
Origins
purify the blood, strengthen the immune system,
enhance mental capacity,cleanse the colon,and main- Enzymes are protein molecules used by the body to
tain proper pH balance in urine. They feel that by perform all of its chemical actions and reactions. The
improving the digestive process,the body is better able body manufactures several thousands of enzymes.
to combat infection and disease. Among them are the digestive enzymes produced by the
Some evidence exists that pancreatic enzymes stomach, pancreas, small intestine, and the salivary
derived from animal sources are helpful in cancertreat- glands of the mouth. Their energy-producing properties
ment. The enzymes may be able to dissolve the coating are responsible for not only the digestion of nutrients,but
on cancer cells and may make it easier for the immune their absorption, transportation, metabolization, and
system to attack the cancer. elimination as well.
A partial list of the wide variety of complaints and Enzyme therapy is based on the work of Dr. Edward
illnesses that can be treated by enzyme therapy includes: Howell in the 1920s and 1930s. Howell proposed that
enzymes from foods work in the stomach to pre-digest
•AIDS
food. He advocated the consumption of large amounts of
•anemia plant enzymes,theorizing that if the body had to use less
of its own enzymes for digestion,it could store them for
•alcohol consumption
maintaining metabolic harmony. Four categories of plant
•anxiety enzymes are helpful in pre-digestion:protease,amylase,
lipase, and cellulase. Cellulase is particularly helpful
•acute inflammation
because the body is unable to produce it.
•back pain
Animal enzymes,such as pepsin extracted from the
•cancer stomach of pigs,work more effectively in the duodenum.
They are typically used for the treatment of nondigestive
•colds
ailments.
•chronic fatiguesyndrome
The seven categories of food enzymes and their
•colitis activities
1214 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypareht
emyznE
•amylase breaks down starches
KEY TERMS
•cellulase breaks down fibers
•lactase breaks down dairy products Celiac disease—A chronic disease characterized
•lipase breaks down fats by defective digestion and use of fats.
•maltase breaks down grains Cystic fibrosis—A genetic disease that causes mul-
tiple digestive, excretion, and respiratory complica-
•protease breaks down proteins
tions. Among the effects, the pancreas fails to pro-
•sucrase breaks down sugars vide secretions needed for the digestion of food.
Enzyme theory generated further interest as the
Duodenum—The first part of the small intestine.
human diet became more dependent on processed and
cooked foods. Enzymes are extremely sensitive to heat, Gaucher’s disease—A rare genetic disease caused
and temperatures above 118°F (48°C) destroy them. Mod- by a deficiency of enzymes needed for the pro-
ern processes of pasteurization,canning,and microwaving cessing of fatty acids.
are particularly harmful to the enzymes in food.
Metabolism—The system of chemical processes
Enzyme supplements are extracted from plants like necessary for living cells to remain healthy.
pineapple and papaya and from the organs of cows and
pigs. The supplements are typically given in tablet or
capsule form. Pancreatic enzymes may also be given by
injection. The dosage varies with the condition being ments,perhaps one or two per day. This is also consid-
treated. For nondigestive ailments,the supplements are ered a positive effect.
taken in the hour before meals so that they can be quickly
Plant enzymes are safe for pregnant women,
absorbed into the blood. For digestive ailments,the sup-
although they should always check with a doctor before
plements are taken immediately before meals accompa-
using enzymes. Pregnant women should avoid animal
nied by a large glass of fluids. Pancreatic enzymes may
enzymes. In rare cases,extremely high doses of enzymes
be accompanied by doses of vitamin A.
can result in a build up of uric acid in the blood or urine
and can cause a break down of proteins.
7Preparations
No special preparations are necessary before begin-
Research and general acceptance
ning enzyme therapy. However,it is always advisable to
talk to a doctor or pharmacist before purchasing enzymes In the United States,the Food and Drug Administra-
and beginning therapy. tion (FDA) has classified enzymes as a food. Therefore,
they can be purchased without a prescription. However,
insurance coverage is usually dependent upon the thera-
Precautions
py resulting from a doctor’s orders.
People with allergies to beef,pork,pineapples,and
papaya may suffer allergic reactions to enzyme supple-
ments. Tablets are often coated to prevent them from Resources
breaking down in the stomach,and usually shouldn’t be
BOOKS
chewed or crushed. People who have difficulty swallow-
Cassileth,Barrie R. The Alternative Medicine Handbook.New
ing pills can request enzyme supplements in capsule York:W.W. Norton,1998.
form. The capsules can then be opened and the contents
sprinkled onto soft foods like applesauce. OTHER
Enzyme Therapy for Your Health.<http://members.tripod.com/
~colloid/enzyme.htm.
Side effects
Questions and Answers about Food Enzymes and Nutrition.
Side effects associated with enzyme therapy include <http://www.enzymes.com/.
heartburn, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, bloating, Therapies:Enzyme Therapy.<http://library.thinkquest.org/
gas, and acne. According to the principles of therapy, 24206/enzyme-therapy.html.
these are temporary cleansing symptoms. Drinking eight
to ten glasses of water daily and getting regular exercise Mary McNulty
can reduce the discomfort of these side effects. Individu-
als may also experience an increase in bowel move- Eosinophilic granuloma see Histiocytosis X
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1215
Enzyme
therapy
Eosinophilic pneumonia KEY TERMS
Definition
Infiltrates—Cells or body fluids that have passed
Eosinophilic pneumonia is a group of diseases in into a tissue or body cavity.
which there is an above normal number of eosinophils in
Sputum—Material coughed up from the throat or
the lungs and blood.
lungs.
Description
Eosinophilia is an increase in the number of
Diagnosis
eosinophils. Eosinophilic pneumonia is characterized
by a large number of eosinophils in the lungs,usually in Since eosinophilia is common to a number of condi-
the absence of an infectious disease. Eosinophils are tions,the physician must rule out asthma and infection
one of the white blood cells and are classified as a gran- by helminths when diagnosing eosinophilic pneumonia.
ulocyte. They are part of the non-specific immune sys- A whole blood countwill reveal an increased number of
tem and participate in inflammatory reactions. eosinophils in the blood. An x ray of the lungs may show
Eosinophils contain cationic molecules that are useful the presence of infiltrates (the eosinophils and fluid). If
for destroying infectious agents,especially heiminthic sputum is produced in coughing,eosinophils will be seen
parasites (worms). There are several types of instead of the more normal profile of granulocytes seen
eosinophilic pneumonia. Loffler’s pneumonia is a tem- when an infectious agent is present.
porary infiltration of eosinophils into the lungs. The
patient will feel tired, have a cough, spasms of the
Treatment
bronchial airway, and difficulty breathing. Loffler’s
pneumonia will clear spontaneously, but slowly over Eosinophilic pneumonia may not respond to drugs
the course of about a month. Another form of used to treat asthma. Eosinophilic pneumonia is usually
eosinophilic pneumonia, pulmonary infiltrates with treated with steroids,particularly glucocorticosteroids.
eosinophilia (PIE), is a more serious and potentially Steroids are not effective against infectious agents,but
fatal disease. In PIE, the patient experiences asthma, the main disease process in eosinophilic pneumonia is an
pulmonary infiltrates,disorders of the peripheral ner- inflammatory reaction,not a response to infection. When
vous system, central nervous systems symptoms, and eosinophilia is produced as a consequence of asthma or
periarteritis nodosa. an infection by helminths, treatment of the asthma or
helminths will reduce the eosinophilia.
Causes and symptoms
Resources
Pneumonia with eosinophils occurs as part of a
BOOKS
hypersensitivity reaction. A hypersensitivity reaction
Berkow,Robert,ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information.
is an over-reaction of the immune system to a particu-
Whitehouse Station,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,
lar stimulus. As part of the hypersensitive reaction,
1997.
cells of the immune system are produced in increased
Clinical Immunology:Principles and Practice.Ed. R. R. Rich.
numbers and migrate into areas targeted by the hyper-
St. Louis:Mosby,1995.
sensitivity reaction. In the case of eosinophilic pneu- Hurst,J. Willis. Medicine for the Practicing Physician.Stam-
monia,the lungs are the target. Generally,eosinophilia ford:Appleton & Lange,1988.
pneumonia is not a reaction to an infection. There is a
John T. Lohr,PhD
correlation between asthma and eosinophilic pneumo-
nia. Eosinophilic pneumonia can also be caused by
Ephedrine see Bronchodilators
drugs and,in some people,by polluted air. The symp-
toms range from mild (coughing, wheezing, and Epicondylitis see Tennis elbow
shortness of breath) to severe and life threatening
Epidemic icterus see Hepatitis A
(severe shortness of breath and difficulty getting
enough oxygen). The symptoms may resolve sponta- Epidemic typhus see Typhus
neously or can persist for long periods of time. In a
Epidemic viral gastroenteritis see Rotavirus
few cases,the disease may rapidly produce life-threat-
ening pneumonia. infections
1216 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ainomuenp
cilihponisoE
Epidermolysis bullosa KEY TERMS
Definition
Collagen—The main supportive protein of carti-
Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a group of rare inherited lage, connective tissue, tendon, skin, and bone.
skin diseases that are characterized by the development of
Dermis—The layer of skin beneath the epidermis.
blisters following minimal pressure to the skin. Blistering
Epidermis—The outermost layer of the skin.
often appears in infancy in response to simply being held or
handled. In rarer forms of the disorder, EB can be life- Keratin—A tough, nonwater-soluble protein found
threatening. There is no cure for the disorder. Treatment in the nails, hair, and the outermost layer of skin.
focuses on preventing and treating woundsand infection. Human hair is made up largely of keratin.
Description
Epidermolysis bullosa has three major forms and at feet. Other forms of EB simplex can lead to more wide-
least 16 subtypes. The three major forms are EB simplex, spread blistering,as well as hair loss and missing teeth.
junctional EB, and dystrophic EB. These can range in Recurrent blistering is annoying but not life threatening.
severity from mild blistering to more disfiguring and life- The second,or junctional,form of EB does not lead to
threatening disease. Physicians diagnose the form of the scarring. However,skin on the areas prone to blistering,
disease based on where the blister forms in relation to the such as elbows and knees,often shrinks. In one variation
epidermis (the skin’s outermost layer) and the deeper of junctional EB,called gravis junctional EB of Herlitz,
dermis layer. the blistering can be so severe that affected infants may not
The prevalence of epidermolysis varies among dif- survive due to massive infection and dehydration.
ferent populations. A study in Scotland estimated the The third form of EB,dystrophic EB,varies greatly
prevalence to be one in 20,400. Researchers in other in terms of severity,but more typically affects the arms
parts of the world estimate the prevalence to be one in and legs. In one variation,called Hallopeau-Siemens EB,
100,000. This variance is due to the variability of expres- repeated blistering and scarring of the hands and feet
sion. Many cases of epidermolysis bullosa are often not causes the fingers and toes to fuse,leaving them dysfunc-
accurately diagnosed and thus,are not reported. tional and with a mitten-like appearance.
Causes and symptoms Diagnosis
EB can be inherited as the result of a dominant Physicians and researchers distinguish between the
genetic abnormality (only one parent carries the abnor- three major subtypes of EB based on which layer of the
mal gene) or a recessive genetic abnormality (both par- epidermis separates from the deeper dermis layer of the
ents carry the abnormal gene). skin below. Patients suspected of having EB should have a
fresh blister biopsied for review. This sample of tissue is
EB simplex results from mutations in genes respon-
examined under an electron microscope or under a con-
sible for keratin 5 and 14, which are proteins that give
ventional microscope using a technique called immunoflu-
cells of the epidermis its structure. EB simplex is trans-
orescence,which helps to map the underlying structure.
mitted in an autosomal dominant fashion.
Knowing that a family member has EB can help
Dystrophic EB is caused by mutations in genes for
establish the diagnosis,but it is possible that parents or
type VII collagen, the protein contained in the fibers
siblings will show no sign of the disease,either because
anchoring the epidermis to the deeper layers of the skin.
it is caused by a new genetic mutation, or because the
The genetic mutations for junctional EB are found in the
parents are carriers of the recessive trait and do not dis-
genes responsible for producing the protein Laminin-5.
play the disease.
Dystrophic EB is an autosomal disorder and will only
result if both parents transmit an abnormal gene during
conception. Treatment
EB simplex, the most common form of EB, is the The most important treatment for EB is daily wound
least serious form of the disease. In most affected indi- care. Because the skin is very fragile,care must be taken
viduals,the blisters are mild and do not scar after they to be certain that dressing changes do not cause further
heal. Some forms of EB simplex affect just the hands and damage. Tape should not be applied directly to skin and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1217
Epidermolysis
bullosa
bandages should be soaked off. Infection is a major con- NY 10006. (212) 513-4090. Fax:(212) 513-4099.
cern,so a topical antibiotic,such as bacitracin,mupirocin, <staff.debra@exario.net>. <http://www.debra.org>.
or sulfadiazine,should be routinely applied. Among per- Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of
sons with recessive dystrophic EB, the anticonvulsant United Kingdom,(DebRA). 13 Wellington Bus. Park,
Dukes Ride,Crowthorne,Berkshire,RG45 6LS. UK 011-
phenytoin is sometimes effective because it decreases
01344 771961. <admin@debra.org.uk.> <http://www.
production of an enzyme that breaks down collagen.
debra.org.uk>.
National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry. University of North
Prognosis Carolina at Chapel Hill,Bolin Heights Bldg. #1,CB#
3369,Chapel Hill,NC 27514-3369. (919) 966-2007. Fax:
The prognosis of EB varies depending on the subtype (919) 966-7080. <eb_registry@med.unc.edu.> <http:
of the disease. Individuals with EB simplex can live long, //www.med.unc.edu/derm/nebr_site>.
fulfilling lives. The severity of the junctional and dys-
OTHER
trophic forms of EB can vary greatly. Infants affected with
Dermatology Online Atlas. <http://www.dermis.net/doia/
some forms of the disease often do not survive infancy;
diagnose.asp?zugr=d&lang=e&diagnr=757320&topic=t>.
other forms can lead to severe scarring and disfigurement.
Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association Inter-
national. <http://debra-international.org/index1.htm>.
Resources Epidermolysis Bullosa Medical Research Foundation.
<http://www.med.stanford.edu/school/dermatology/ebmrf/>.
BOOKS Oregon Health Sciences University. <http://www.ohsu.edu/
Fine,Jo-David,et al. Epidermolysis Bullosa:Clinical,Epi- cliniweb/C17/C17.800.865.410.html>.
demiologic,and Laboratory Advances,and the Findings University of Iowa College of Medicine. <http://tray.dermatology.
of the National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry.Balti- uiowa.edu/EBA-001.htm>.
more:Johns Hopkins Univ Press,1999.
Fitzpatrick,Thomas B.,Richard A. Johnson,Wolff Klaus,and
L. Fleming Fallon,Jr.,MD,PhD,DrPH
Dick Suurmond. Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical
Dermatology.4th ed. New York:McGraw-Hill,2000.
Lin,Andrew N.,and D. Martin Carter. Epidermolysis Bullosa:
Basic and Clinical Aspects.New York:Springer Verlag,
1992.
Mallory,S.B. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology.Pearl River,NY:
Epididymitis
Parthenon,2001.
Definition
PERIODICALS
Brust,Mary D.,and Andrew N. Lin. “Epidermolysis Bullosa: Epididymitis is inflammation or infection of the epi-
Practical Management and Clinical Update.”Dermatology didymis. In this long coiled tube attached to the upper
Nursing8 (April 1996):81–9.
part of each testicle,sperm mature and are stored before
Cotell,S.,N. D. Robinson,and L. S. Chan. “Autoimmune Blis-
ejaculation.
tering Skin Diseases.”American Journal of Emerging
Medicine18,no. 3 (2000):288–99.
Eichenfield,L. F.,and P. J. Honig. “Blistering Disorders in Description
Childhood.”Pediatric Clinics of North America38,no. 4
(1991):959–76. Epididymitis is the most common cause of painin
Horn,H. M.,G.C. Priestley,R. A. Eady,and M.J. Tidman. the scrotum. The acute form is usually associated with
“The Prevalence of Epidermolysis bullosa in Scotland.” the most severe pain and swelling. If symptoms last for
British Journal of Dermatology136,no. 4 (1997): more than six weeks after treatment begins,the condition
560–64. is considered chronic.
Lin,Andrew N. “Management of Patients with Epidermolysis
Epididymitis can occur any time after the onset of
Bullosa.”Dermatologic Clinics14 (April 1996):381–87.
McKenna,K. E.,M. Y. Walsh,and E. A. Bingham. “Epider- pubertybut is most common between the ages of 18 and
molysis bullosa in Northern Ireland.”British Journal of 40. It is especially common among members of the mili-
Dermatology127,no. 4 (1992):318–21. tary who exercisefor extended periods without emptying
their bladders.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Dermatology. PO Box 4014,930 N. Factors that increase the risk of developing epi-
Meacham Rd.,Schaumburg,IL 60168-4014. (847) 330- didymitis include:
0230. Fax:(847) 330-0050. <http://www.aad.org>.
•infection of the bladder,kidney,prostate,or urinary tract
Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of
America (DebRA). 40 Rector St.,Suite 1403,New York, •other recent illness
1218 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitimydidipE
•narrowing of the urethra (the tube that drains urine he should use stool softeners or eat plenty of fruit,nuts,
from the bladder) whole grain cereals,and other foods with laxative prop-
erties.
•use of a urethral catheter.
An ice bag wrapped in a towel can reduce pain and
Causes and symptoms swelling but should be removed from the inflamed area
for a few minutes every hour to prevent burns.
Although epididymitis can be caused by the same
organisms that cause some sexually transmitted dis- Strenuous activity should be avoided until symp-
eases(STDs) or occur after prostate surgery,the condi- toms disappear. Sexual activity should not be resumed
tion is generally due to pus-generating bacteria associat- until a month after symptoms disappear.
ed with infections in other parts of the body.
If a second course of treatment doesn’t eradicate
Epididymitis can also be caused by injury or infec- stubborn symptoms,longterm anti-inflammatory therapy
tion of the scrotum or by irritation from urine that has may be recommended. In rare instances,chronic symp-
accumulated in the vas deferens (the duct through which toms require surgery.
sperm travels after leaving the epididymis).
Epididymitis is characterized by sudden redness and Surgery
swelling of the scrotum. The affected testicle is hard and
Each of the surgical procedures used to treat epi-
sore,and the other testicle may feel tender. The patient
didymitis is performed under local anesthesia on an out-
has chills and fever and usually has acute urethritis
patient basis. Both of them cause sterility.
(inflammation of the urethra).
Epididymectomy involves removing the inflamed
Enlarged lymph nodes in the groin cause scrotal pain
section of the epididymitis through a small incision in the
that intensifies throughout the day and may become so
scrotum.
severe that walking normally becomes impossible.
Bilateral vasectomyprevents fluid and sperm from
Diagnosis passing through the epididymis. This procedure is usual-
ly performed on men who have chronic epididymitis or
Laboratory tests used to diagnose epididymitis
on elderly patients undergoing prostate surgery.
include:
•urinalysis and urine culture
Prognosis
•examination of discharges from the urethra and prostate
gland Pain generally subsides 24–72 hours after treatment
begins. Complete healing may take weeks or months.
•blood tests to measure white-cell counts
Treatment Prevention
Because epididymitis that affects both testicles can Using condoms and not having sex with anyone who
make a man sterile,antibiotic therapy must be initiated has an STD can prevent some cases of epididymitis.
as soon as symptoms appear. To prevent reinfection,
medication must be taken exactly as prescribed,even if
Resources
the patient’s symptoms disappear or he begins to feel bet-
ter. Over-the-counter anti-inflammatories can relieve BOOKS
pain but should not be used without the approval of a Shaw,Michael,ed. Everything You Need to Know About Dis-
family physician or urologist.
eases.Springhouse,PA:Springhouse Corporation,1996.
Bed rest is recommended until symptoms subside, OTHER
and patients are advised to wear athletic supporters when “Epididymitis.”Digital Urology Journal.7 June 1998 <http://
they resume normal activities. If pain is severe,a local www.duj.com/epididymitis.html>.
anesthetic like lidocaine (Xylocaine) may be injected “Epididymitis.”ThriveOnline.6 June 1998 <http://thriveonline.
directly into the spermatic cord. oxygen.com>.
Epidural abscess see Central nervous
Self-care
system infections
A patient who has epididymitis should not drink
beverages that contain caffeine. To prevent constipation, Epidural anesthetic see Anesthesia, local
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1219
Epididymitis
pain. Because the swollen epiglottis interferes signifi-
Epiglottitis cantly with air movement, every breath creates a loud,
harsh,high-pitched sound referred to as stridor. Because
Definition the vocal cords are located in the larynx just below the
area of the epiglottis, the swollen epiglottis makes the
Epiglottitis is an infection of the epiglottis, which
patient’s voice sound muffled and strained. Swallowing
can lead to severe airway obstruction.
becomes difficult,and the patient may drool. The patient
often leans forward and juts out his or her jaw, while
Description struggling for breath.
When air is inhaled (inspired),it passes through the Epiglottitis strikes suddenly and progresses quickly.
nose and the nasopharynx or through the mouth and the A child may begin complaining of a sore throat, and
oropharynx. These are both connected to the larynx, a within a few hours be suffering from extremely severe
tube made of cartilage. The air continues down the larynx airway obstruction.
to the trachea. The trachea then splits into two branches,
the left and right bronchi (bronchial tubes). These bronchi
Diagnosis
branch into smaller air tubes that run within the lungs,
leading to the small air sacs of the lungs (alveoli). Diagnosis begins with a high level of suspicion that
a quickly progressing illness with fever,sore throat,and
Either food,liquid,or air may be taken in through
airway obstruction is very likely to be epiglottitis. If
the mouth. While air goes into the larynx and the respira-
epiglottitis is suspected, no efforts should be made to
tory system, food and liquid are directed into the tube
look at the throat,or to swab the throat in order to obtain
leading to the stomach,the esophagus. Because food or
a culture for identification of the causative organism.
liquid in the bronchial tubes or lungs could cause a
These maneuvers may cause the larynx to go into spasm
blockage or lead to an infection,the airway is protected.
(laryngospasm), completely closing the airway. These
The epiglottis is a leaf-like piece of cartilage extending
procedures should only be performed in a fully-equipped
upwards from the larynx. The epiglottis can close down
operating room,so that if laryngospasm occurs,a breath-
over the larynx when someone is eating or drinking,pre-
ing tube can be immediately placed in order to keep the
venting these food and liquids from entering the airway.
airway open.
Epiglottitis is an infection and inflammation of the
An instrument called a laryngoscope is often used in
epiglottis. Because the epiglottis may swell considerably,
the operating room to view the epiglottis, which will
there is a danger that the airway will be blocked off by
appear cherry-red and quite swollen. An x-ray picture
the very structure designed to protect it. Air is then
taken from the side of the neck should also be obtained.
unable to reach the lungs. Without intervention,epiglotti-
The swollen epiglottis has a characteristic appearance,
tis has the potential to be fatal.
called the “thumb sign.”
Epiglottitis is primarily a disease of two to seven-
year-old children,although older children and adults can
Treatment
also contract it. Boys are twice as likely as girls to devel-
op this infection. Because epiglottitis involves swelling Treatment almost always involves the immediate
and infection of tissues,which are all located at or above establishment of an artificial airway:inserting a breath-
the level of the epiglottis,it is sometimes referred to as ing tube into the throat (intubation); or making a tiny
supraglottitis (supra,meaning above). About 25% of all opening toward the base of the neck and putting a breath-
children with this infection also have pneumonia. ing tube into the trachea (tracheostomy). Because the
patient’s apparent level of distress may not match the
actual severity of the situation,and because the disease’s
Causes and symptoms
progression can be quite surprisingly rapid,it is prefer-
The most common cause of epiglottitis is infection able to go ahead and place the artificial airway, rather
with the bacteria called Haemophilus influenzae type b. than adopting a wait-and-see approach.
Other types of bacteria are also occasionally responsi-
Because epiglottitis is caused by a bacteria,antibi-
ble for this infection,including some types of Strepto-
oticssuch as cefotaxime,ceftriaxone,or ampicillin with
coccusbacteria and the bacteria responsible for causing
sulbactam should be given through a needle placed in a
diphtheria.
vein (intravenously). This prevents the bacteria that are
A patient with epiglottitis typically experiences a circulating throughout the bloodstream from causing
sudden fever,and begins having severe throat and neck infection elsewhere in the body.
1220 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitittolgipE
Ray,C. George,and Kenneth J. Ryan. “Middle and Lower Res-
KEY TERMS piratory Tract Infections.”In Sherris Medical Microbiolo-
gy:An Introduction to Infectious Diseases.3rd ed. Ed.
Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1994.
Epiglottis—A leaf-like piece of cartilage extending
Stoffman,Phyllis. The Family Guide to Preventing and Treat-
upwards from the larynx, which can close like a
ing 100 Infectious Diseases.New York:John Wiley &
lid over the trachea to prevent the airway from
Sons,1995.
receiving any food or liquid being swallowed.
ORGANIZATIONS
Extubation—Removal of a breathing tube.
American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Intubation—Putting a breathing tube into the air- Surgery,Inc. One Prince St.,Alexandria VA 22314-3357.
way. (703) 836-4444. <http://www.entnet.org>.
Laryngospasm—Spasm of the larynx.
Maureen Haggerty
Larynx—The part of the airway lying between the Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
pharynx and the trachea.
Nasopharynx—The part of the airway into which Epilepsy see Seizure disorder
the nose leads.
Epinephrine see Bronchodilators
Oropharynx—The part of the airway into which
the mouth leads.
Supraglottitis—Another term for epiglottitis.
Trachea—The part of the airway that leads into the
bronchial tubes. Episiotomy
Tracheostomy—A procedure in which a small
Definition
opening is made in the neck and into the trachea. A
breathing tube is then placed through this opening. An episiotomy is a surgical incision made in the area
between the vagina and anus (perineum). This is done
during the last stages of labor and delivery to expand the
opening of the vagina to prevent tearing during the deliv-
ery of the baby.
Prognosis
With treatment (including the establishment of an
Purpose
artificial airway),only about 1% of children with epiglot-
titis die. Without the artificial airway,this figure jumps to This procedure is usually done during the delivery or
6%. Most patients recover form the infection, and can birthing process when the vaginal opening does not
have the breathing tube removed (extubation) within a stretch enough to allow the baby to be delivered without
few days. tearing the surrounding tissue.
Prevention Precautions
Prevention involves the use of a vaccine against H. Prior to the onset of labor, pregnant women may
influenzae type b(called the Hib vaccine). It is given to want to discuss the use of episiotomy with their care
babies at two,four,six,and 15 months. Use of this vac- providers. It is possible that,with adequate preparation
cine has made epiglottitis a very rare occurrence. and if the stages of labor and delivery are managed with
adequate coaching and support,the need for an episioto-
Resources my may be reduced.
BOOKS
Durand,Marlenel. “Laryngitis,Croup,and Epiglottitis.”In Description
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony
An episiotomy is a surgical incision, usually made
S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
with sterile scissors,in the perineum as the baby’s head is
Orenstein,David. “Acute Inflammatory Upper Airway
being delivered. This procedure may be used if the tissue
Obstruction.”In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics,ed.
Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co., around the vaginal opening begins tearing or does not seem
1996. to be stretching enough to allow the baby to be delivered.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1221
Episiotomy
In most cases,the physician makes a midline inci- However, an episiotomy is always necessary during a
sion along a straight line from the lowest edge of the forceps delivery because of the size of the forceps.
vaginal opening to toward the anus. In other cases,the
episiotomy is performed by making a diagonal incision
Preparation
across the midline between the vagina and anus. This
It may be possible to avoid the need for an episioto-
method is used much less often, may be more painful,
my. Pregnant women may want to talk with their care
and may require more healing time than the midline inci-
providers about the use of episiotomy during the deliv-
sion. After the baby is delivered through the extended
ery. Kegel exercises are often recommended during the
vaginal opening,the incision is closed with stitches. A
pregnancyto help strengthen the pelvic floor muscles.
local anesthetic agent may be applied or injected to numb
Prenatal perineal massage may help to stretch and relax
the area before it is sewn up (sutured).
the tissue around the vaginal opening. During the deliv-
Several reasons are cited for performing epi- ery process,warm compresses can be applied to the area
siotomies. Some experts believe that an episiotomy along with the use of perineal massage. Coaching and
speeds up the birthing process,making it easier for the support are also important during the delivery process. A
baby to be delivered. This can be important if there is any slowed, controlled pushing during the second stage of
sign of distress that may harm the mother or baby. labor (when the mother gets the urge to push) may allow
Because tissues in this area may tear during the delivery, the tissues to stretch rather than tear. Also, an upright
another reason for performing an episiotomy is that a birthing position (rather than one where the mother is
clean incision is easier to repair than a jagged tear and lying down) may decrease the need for an episiotomy.
may heal faster. Although the use of episiotomy is some-
times described as protecting the pelvic muscles and pos-
Aftercare
sibly preventing future problems with urinary inconti-
The area of the episiotomy may be uncomfortable or
nence,it is not clear that the procedure actually helps.
even painful for several days. Several practices can
The use of episiotomy during the birthing process is relieve some of the pain. Cold packs can be applied to
fairly widespread in the United States. Estimates of epi- the perineal area to reduce swelling and discomfort. Use
siotomy use in hospitals range from 65–95% of deliver- of the Sitz bathavailable at the hospital or birth center
ies,depending on how many times the mother has given can ease the discomfort,too. This unit circulates warm
birth previously. This routine use of episiotomy is being water over the area. A squirt bottle with water can be
reexamined in many hospitals and health care settings. used to clean the area after urination or defecation rather
1222 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ymotoisipE
Injecting local anesthetic Cutting the perineum Closing the incision
An episiotomy is a surgical incision made in the perineum,the area of tissue between the vaginal opening and the anus,dur-
ing the birthing process.This procedure may be used if the tissue around the vaginal opening begins to tear or is not stretch-
ing enough to allow the baby to be delivered vaginally.In the United States,the rate of episiotomies being performed is esti-
mated at 65–95%.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
increased risk of infection. Additional tearing or tissue
KEY TERMS damage may occur beyond the episiotomy incision,leav-
ing a cut and a tear to be repaired.
Kegel exercises—A series of contractions and
relaxations of the muscles in the perineal area. Resources
These exercises are thought to strengthen the
BOOKS
pelvic floor and may help prevent urinary inconti-
The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.16th ed. Ed.
nence in women. Robert Berkow. Rahway,NJ:Merck Research Laborato-
Perineum—The area between the opening of the ries,1992.
vagina and the anus in a woman, or the area PERIODICALS
between the scrotum and the anus in a man. Klein,M. C.,et al. “Relationship of Episiotomy to Perineal
Sitz bath—A shallow tub or bowl, sometimes Trauma and Morbidity,Sexual Dysfunction,and Pelvic
Floor Relaxation.”American Journal of Obstetrics and
mounted above a toilet, that allows the perineum
Gynecology171 (1994):591-598.
and buttocks to be immersed in circulating water.
Lydon-Rochelle,M. T.,L. Albers,and D. Teaf. “Perineal Out-
Urinary incontinence—The inability to prevent comes and Nurse-Midwifery Management.”Journal of
the leakage or discharge of urine. This situation Nurse Midwifery40,no. 1 (Jan./Feb. 1995):13-18.
becomes more common as people age, and is
OTHER
more common in women who have given birth to
Childbirth.org.<http://www.childbirth.org>.
more than one child.
Altha Roberts Edgren
Epispadias see Hypospadias and epispadias
than wiping with tissue. Also,the area should be patted
Epistaxis see Nosebleed
dry rather than wiped. Cleansing pads soaked in witch
hazel (such as Tucks) are very effective for cleaning the EPS see Electrophysiology study of the
area and also feel soothing.
heart
Risks
Several side effects of episiotomy have been report-
ed,including infection,increased pain,prolonged heal-
ing time, and increased discomfort once sexual inter- Epstein-Barr virus test
course is resumed. There is also the risk that the episioto-
Definition
my incision will be deeper or longer than is necessary to
permit the birth of the infant. There is a risk of increased The Epstein-Barr virus test is a blood test,or group of
bleeding. tests,to determine the presence or absence of antibodies in
the blood stream directed against proteins of the Epstein-
Barr virus,the cause of infectious mononucleosis.
Normal results
In a normal and well managed delivery,an episioto-
Purpose
my may be avoided altogether. If an episiotomy is
deemed to be necessary,a simple midline incision will be The test is primarily used to detect whether first time
made to extend the vaginal opening without additional infection (called primary infection) with the Epstein-Barr
tearing or extensive trauma to the perineal area. Although virus is currently occurring, or has occurred within a
there may be some pain associated with the healing of short period of time. The pattern of the antibodies detect-
the episiotomy incision,relief can usually be provided ed can,however,tell if the person has never been infect-
with mild pain relievers and supportive measures,such as ed with the Epstein-Barr virus, or if the infection
the application of cold packs. occurred in the more distant past. These tests are mostly
utilized in the diagnosis of Epstein-Barr virus-associated
infectious mononucleosis when the more common diag-
Abnormal results
nostic test,the heterophile antibody,is negative,or in sit-
An episiotomy incision that is too long or deep may uations where the infection is manifesting unusual symp-
extend into the rectum, causing more bleeding and an toms. Therefore,the tests are often not needed in a situa-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1223
Epstein-Barr
virus
test
tion where a doctor believes that a person has mononu- Preparation
cleosis and the heterophile test (also called the monospot
The skin area from which the blood sample will be
test) is positive.
obtained is wiped with an antiseptic such as alcohol or
In addition,Epstein-Barr virus testing is usually not iodine.
needed in the evaluation of a patient who has long-last-
ing fatigue, and may have the chronic fatigue syn-
Aftercare
drome. Initially,it was thought that discovering a partic-
ular pattern of antibodies to this virus was helpful in the The aftercare is similar to that for any blood test.
diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome,but this no longer Usually, pressure is applied to the area for several
appears to be the case. moments until bleeding stops. If the results are difficult
to interpret, it may be necessary to re-test later, after
Precautions waiting one to three weeks. The change in the amounts of
antibody detected between the two tests can be particu-
As in any blood test,standard precautions should be
larly useful,at times,in helping to make a diagnosis.
performed to prevent infection at the site where the blood
is obtained, and to prevent excess bleeding. Normally,
Risks
the site is cleaned with an antiseptic liquid prior to the
blood being obtained; a sterile non-reusable needle and There are no risks over and above those of having
syringe are used; and,once the needle is removed,pres- blood drawn for any other purpose. These tests are more
sure is placed at the site until bleeding has stopped. expensive than many other blood tests but are usually
covered by medical insurance.
Description
Normal results
These tests are more often performed in a consulting
laboratory than at a physician’s office or in a hospital The pattern of the three antibodies can be used to
laboratory. Like most antibody tests,they are performed determine whether the person has not had infection with
on serum,the liquid part of the blood obtained after the EBV to this point (is susceptible to infection); is current-
whole blood is allowed to clot in a tube. Antibodies can ly, or recently, infected with EBV for the first time; or
be detected against several components of the Epstein- has had first time infection with EBV sometime in the
Barr virus (EBV). These components are the EBV early past (more than six months ago).
antigen (EA), the viral capsid antigen (VCA), and the
If one defines “normal”results as either not having
nuclear antigen (EBNA). These several antigens are dif-
EBV in the past, and call that category one; or having
ferent proteins that are produced in the process (stages)
had it in the past,and call that category two. Most young
of the virus’growth.
children below the age of five will fall into category one,
At the time of infection with Epstein-Barr virus, while most adults over the age of 20 years will fall into
antibodies to EA are found and usually last for four to six category two.
months only. This antibody,however,persists substan-
The results for susceptibility are:
tially longer in about 10% of persons who have had EBV
infection in the more remote past. The absence of anti- •antibody to EA = negative
body to EA when other EBV antibodies are present
•antibody to VCA (either IgM or IgG) = negative
strongly suggests that first time infection with EBV
•antibody to EBNA = Negative
occurred in the past.
The results for past infection are:
Antibody to VCA is found both early and late in
EBV infection. At the time of infection, antibody of •antibody to EA = negative (90% of time)
both the IgM and IgG types are detectable. After four to
•antibody to VCA IgM = negative
six months,usually,only the IgG antibody against VCA
•antibody to VCA IgG = positive
can be found.
•antibody to EBNA = positive
Unlike antibodies to EA and VCA, antibody to
EBNA does not usually develop until recovery from first It is important to realize that the Epstein-Barr virus,
time infection of this virus. Therefore,finding detectable like all the human herpes viruses,does not totally leave
amounts of antibody to EBNA during an illness which the body after the patient recovers from illness. With
might be caused by EBV makes the causal relationship EBV,the virus will intermittently recur in the saliva of
very unlikely. people without any symptoms. Such people will have a
1224 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tset
suriv
rraB-nietspE
test pattern of previous infection. It is this group of peo-
ple who can transmit EBV to others without themselves KEY TERMS
being ill.
Bacteremia—The presence of bacteria in the
Abnormal results blood.
Streptococcus—A bacteria that causes erysipelas
The results for current or recent infection are:
and strep throat, as well as other infections.
•antibody to EA = positive
•antibody to VCA IgM = positive
•antibody to VCA IgG = positive
bacteria is responsible for such infections as strep throat,
•antibody to EBNA = negative
and infections of both surgical and other kinds of
Without the pattern of the three antibodies,it can be woundsin the skin. The infection occurs most often in
difficult to be accurate in interpretation. The presence of young infants and the elderly.
antibody to VCA IgM is the best single test for current or
recent first time infection.
Causes and symptoms
Resources
Erysipelas usually occurs rather abruptly. When the
BOOKS preceding infection was strep throat,the rash begins on
Bailey,R. Eugene. “Infectious Mononucleosis.”In Current the face. Occasionally,when the preceding infection was
Diagnosis.Vol. 9. Ed. Rex B. Conn,et al. Philadelphia:W. of a wound from an injury or operation, the rash will
B. Saunders Co.,1997. appear on an arm or leg.
Fleischer,Gary R. “Epstein-Barr Virus.”In Textbook of Human
Virology.2nd ed. Ed. Robert B. Belshe. St. Louis:Mosby Classically, the usual presentation is a bright-red,
Year Book,1990. butterfly-shaped rash appearing across the bridge of the
nose and the cheeks. It is hot to the touch,painful,shiny,
PERIODICALS
and swollen,with clearly defined margins. The edges of
Henle,G.,W. Henle,and C. A. Horowitz. “Epstein-Barr Virus
the rash are a raised ridge,hard to the touch. There may
Specific Diagnosis:Tests in Infectious Mononucleosis.”
be fluid-filled bumps scattered along the area. The rash
Human Pathology5 (1997):551-558.
spreads rapidly. Some patients have swelling of the eye-
lids,sometimes so severe that their eyes swell shut. The
Larry Lutwick,MD,FACP
patient may have fever, chills, loss of energy, nausea
ERCP see Endoscopic retrograde and vomiting, and swollen, tender lymph nodes. In
severe cases, walled-off areas of pus (abscesses) may
cholangiopancreatography
develop beneath the skin. If left untreated,the strepto-
Erectile disorder see Impotence coccal bacteria may begin circulating in the bloodstream
(a condition called bacteremia). A patient may then
Ergotamine see Antimigraine drugs
develop an overwhelming,systemic infection called sep-
Erosive gastritis see Gastritis sis,with a high risk of death.
Diagnosis
The rash of erysipelas is very characteristic,raising
Erysipelas the practitioner’s suspicion towards that diagnosis,espe-
cially when coupled with a history of recent strep infec-
Definition
tion. Attempts to culture (grow) the bacteria from a sam-
Erysipelas is a skin infection that often follows strep ple of the rash usually fail. When the bacteria are present
throat. in the blood, they may be grown in a laboratory, and
identified under a microscope. Other laboratory tests
involve reacting fluorescently-tagged antibodies with a
Description
sample of the patient’s infected tissue. This type of test
Erysipelas,also called St. Anthony’s fire,is caused may be successful in positively identifying the strepto-
by infection by Group A Streptococci.This same type of coccal bacteria.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1225
Erysipelas
Treatment
Erythema multiforme
Penicillin is the drug of choice for treating erysipelas.
It can usually be given by mouth,although in severe cases Definition
(or in cases of diagnosed bacteremia) it may be given
through a needle placed in a vein (intravenously). Erythema multiforme is a skin disease that causes
lesions and redness around the lesions.
Even with antibiotic treatment,swelling may contin-
ue to spread. Other symptoms,such as fever,pain,and
redness,usually decrease rapidly after penicillin is start- Description
ed. Cold packs and pain relievers may help decrease dis-
Erythema multiforme appears on the skin and the
comfort. Within about five to 10 days,the affected skin
mucous membranes (the lining of the mouth,digestive
may begin drying up and flaking off.
tract,vagina,and other organs). Large,symmetrical red
blotches appear all over the skin in a circular pattern. On
Prognosis mucous membranes,it begins as blisters and progresses
to ulcers. A more advanced form,called Stevens-Johnson
With prompt treatment, the prognosis from erysi-
syndrome,can be severe and even fatal.
pelas is excellent. Delay of treatment,however,increases
the chance for bacteremia and the potential for death
from overwhelming sepsis. This is particularly true of Causes and symptoms
people with weakened immune systems (babies, the
Erythema multiforme has many causes,most com-
elderly, and people ill with other diseases, especially
monly are drugs. Penicillin,sulfonamides,certain epilep-
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome,or AIDS). Fre-
sy drugs,aspirin,and acetaminophenare the most likely
quently,an individual who has had erysipelas will have it
medication-induced causes. Erythema multiforme can
occur again in the same location.
also be caused by certain diseases. Herpes virus and
mycoplasma pneumoniaare likely infectious causes.
Prevention
Prevention involves appropriate and complete treat- Diagnosis
ment of streptococcal infections,including strep throat
The appearance of the rash is sufficiently unique to
and wound infections.
identify it on sight. Having identified it, the physician
will determine the underlying cause.
Resources
BOOKS Treatment
Bolognia,Jean L.,and Irwin M. Braverman. “Skin Manifesta-
tions of Internal Disease.”In Harrison’s Principles of Erythema multiforme is inadvertently treated when
Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York: the causative agent,whether it be a drug or a disease,is
McGraw-Hill,1997. treated. In severe cases, cortisone-like medication is
“Streptococci.”In Sherris Medical Microbiology:An Introduc- often used along with general supportive measures and
tion to Infectious Diseases.3rd ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. prevention of infection.
Norwalk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1994.
Stevens,Dennis L. “Infections of the Skin,Muscle,and Soft Tis-
sues.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Prognosis
Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
As a rule,the rash abates by itself without damaging
Stoffman,Phyllis. The Family Guide to Preventing and Treat-
the skin. Only in the case of infection,severe blistering,
ing 100 Infectious Diseases.New York:John Wiley &
or continued use of an offending drug does complica-
Sons,1995.
tions occur.
Todd,James. “Bacterial Infections.”In Nelson Textbook of
Pediatrics,ed. Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B.
Saunders Co.,1996. Resources
PERIODICALS BOOKS
Huerter,Christopher,et al. “Helpful Clues to Common Rash- Bennett,J. Claude,and Fred Plum,eds. Cecil Textbook of Med-
es.”Patient Care31,8 (30 Apr. 1997):9+. icine.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed.
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1995.
Fritsch,Peter O.,and Peter M. Elias. “Erythema Multiforme
Erythema infectiosum see Fifth disease and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.”In Dermatology in Gen-
1226 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emrofitlum
amehtyrE
KEY TERMS KEY TERMS
Herpes virus—Viruses that can infect the skin, Biopsy—Surgical removal of tissue for diagnostic
mucous membranes, and brain, and they are purposes.
responsible for such diseases as herpes simplex,
Panniculitis—Inflammation of fatty tissue.
chicken pox, and shingles.
Mycoplasma pneumonia—An incomplete bacteri-
um that infects the lung.
Once the skin problem has been diagnosed, its
underlying cause must then be identified. A lengthy eval-
uation may ensue, and often times the cause remains
eral Medicine,ed. Thomas B. Fitzpatrick,et al. New York: unknown.
McGraw-Hill,1993.
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
Treatment
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Painful nodules can be treated with mild painkillers
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD and local application of ice packs. Medical attention will
be directed toward the underlying disease.
The nodules will eventually disappear, leaving no
trace behind.
Erythema nodosum
Resources
Definition BOOKS
Bennett,J. Claude,and Fred Plum,eds. Cecil Textbook of Med-
Erythema nodosum is a skin disorder characterized
icine.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
by painful red nodules appearing mostly on the shins.
Berger,Timothy G.,“Skin and Appendages.”In Current Med-
ical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed. Stephen
Description McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1995.
Bondi,Edward E.,and Gerald S. Lazarus. “Panniculitis.”In
Erythema nodosum is an eruption of tender red Dermatology in General Medicine,ed. Thomas B. Fitz-
lumps on both shins and occasionally the arms and face. patrick,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1993.
Bruising often accompanies the nodule formation. Ery-
thema nodosum is most prevalent in young adults. J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
Erythremia see Polycythemia vera
Causes and symptoms
Erythema nodosum can be caused by many impor-
tant and treatable diseases. Among them are tuberculo-
sis,several fungal lung infections,leprosy,inflammatory
bowel disease,and some potentially dangerous bacterial
Erythroblastosis fetalis
infections. Drugs can also induce erythema nodosum.
The most common are penicillin, sulfonamides, and
Definition
birth control pills.
Erythroblastosis fetalis refers to two potentially dis-
abling or fatal blood disorders in infants:Rh incompatibil-
Diagnosis
ity disease and ABO incompatibility disease. Either dis-
There are a few other skin eruptions that mimic ery- ease may be apparent before birth and can cause fetal
thema nodosum,so the physician may have to perform a deathin some cases. The disorder is caused by incompati-
biopsy to sort them out. There are a few types of panni- bility between a mother’s blood and her unborn baby’s
culitis,fat inflammation,that may signal a cancersome- blood. Because of the incompatibility, the mother’s
where in the body,and there are other kinds of inflamma- immune system may launch an immune response against
tion that may confuse the diagnosis. the baby’s red blood cells. As a result,the baby’s blood
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1227
Erythroblastosis
fetalis
cells are destroyed,and the baby may suffer severe anemia There are two types of incompatibility diseases:Rh
(deficiency in red blood cells),brain damage,or death. incompatibility disease and ABO incompatibility disease.
Both diseases have similar symptoms,but Rh disease is
much more severe,because anti-Rh antibodies cross over
Description
the placenta more readily than anti-A or anti-B antibod-
Red blood cells carry several types of proteins, ies. (The immune system does not form antibodies
called antigens,on their surfaces. The A,B,and O anti- against the O antigen.) Therefore,a greater percentage of
gens are used to classify a person’s blood as type A,B, the baby’s blood cells are destroyed by Rh disease.
AB, or O. Each parent passes one A, B, or O antigen Both incompatibility diseases are uncommon in the
gene to their child. How the genes are paired determines United States due to medical advances over the last 50
the person’s blood type. years. For example,prior to 1946 (when newborn blood
A person who inherits an A antigen gene from each transfusions were introduced) 20,000 babies were affected
parent has type A blood; receiving two B antigen genes by Rh disease yearly. Further advances,such as suppress-
corresponds with type B blood; and inheriting A and B ing the mother’s antibody response,have reduced the inci-
antigen genes means a person has type AB blood. If the dence of Rh disease to approximately 4,000 cases per year.
O antigen gene is inherited from both parents,the child Rh disease only occurs if a mother is Rh-negative and
has type O blood; however,the pairing of A and O anti- her baby is Rh-positive. For this situation to occur,the baby
gen genes corresponds with type A blood; and if the B must inherit the Rh factor gene from the father. Most peo-
antigen gene is matched with the O antigen gene,the per- ple are Rh-positive. Only 15% of the caucasian population
son has type B blood. is Rh-negative,compared to 5–7% of the african american
Another red blood cell antigen,called the Rh factor, population and virtually none of Asian populations.
also plays a role in describing a person’s blood type. A ABO incompatibility disease is almost always limit-
person with at least one copy of the gene for the Rh fac- ed to babies with A or B antigens whose mothers have
tor has Rh-positive blood; if no copies are inherited,the type O blood. Approximately one third of these babies
person’s blood type is Rh-negative. In blood typing,the show evidence of the mother’s antibodies in their blood-
presence of A, B, and O antigens, plus the presence or stream,but only a small percentage develop symptoms of
absence of the Rh-factor,determine a person’s specific ABO incompatibility disease.
blood type,such as A-positive,B-negative,and so on.
A person’s blood type has no effect on health. How-
Cause and symptoms
ever,an individual’s immune system considers only that
person’s specific blood type, or a close match, accept- Rh disease and ABO incompatibility disease are
able. If a radically different blood type is introduced into caused when a mother’s immune system produces anti-
the bloodstream,the immune system produces antibod- bodies against the red blood cells of her unborn child.
ies,proteins that specifically attack and destroy any cell The antibodies cause the baby’s red blood cells to be
carrying the foreign antigen. destroyed and the baby develops anemia. The baby’s
body tries to compensate for the anemia by releasing
Determining a person’s blood type is very important
immature red blood cells,called erythroblasts,from the
if she becomes pregnant. Blood cells from the unborn
bone marrow.
baby (fetal red blood cells) can cross over into the moth-
er’s bloodstream,especially at delivery. If the mother and The overproduction of erythroblasts can cause the
her baby have compatible blood types, the crossover liver and spleen to become enlarged,potentially causing
does not present any danger. However,if the blood types liver damage or a ruptured spleen. The emphasis on ery-
are incompatible,the mother’s immune system manufac- throblast production is at the cost of producing other
tures antibodies against the baby’s blood. types of blood cells,such as platelets and other factors
important for blood clotting. Since the blood lacks clot-
Usually,this incompatibility is not a factor in a first
ting factors,excessive bleeding can be a complication.
pregnancy, because few fetal blood cells reach the
mother’s bloodstream until delivery. The antibodies that The destroyed red blood cells release the blood’s
form after delivery cannot affect the first child. In later red pigment (hemoglobin) which degrades into a yellow
pregnancies,fetuses and babies may be in grave danger. substance called bilirubin. Bilirubin is normally pro-
The danger arises from the possibility that the mother’s duced as red blood cells die, but the body is only
antibodies will attack the fetal red blood cells. If this equipped to handle a certain low level of bilirubin in the
happens,the fetus or baby can suffer severe health effects bloodstream at one time. Erythroblastosis fetalis over-
and may die. whelms the removal system,and high levels of bilirubin
1228 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
silatef
sisotsalborhtyrE
KEY TERMS
Amniocentesis—A procedure in which a needle is Cordocentesis—A procedure for delivering a blood
inserted through a pregnant woman’s abdomen and transfusion to a fetus. It involves a fine needle being
into her uterus to withdraw a small sample of amni- threaded through a pregnant woman’s abdomen
otic fluid. The amniotic fluid can be examined for and into the umbilical cord with the aid of ultra-
sign of disease or other problems afflicting the fetus. sound imaging.
Amniotic fluid—The fluid that surrounds a fetus in Hemoglobin—A molecule in red blood cells that
the uterus. transports oxygen and gives the cells their charac-
teristic color.
Anemia—A condition in which there is an abnor-
mally low number of red blood cells in the blood- Hydrops fetalis—A condition in which a fetus or
stream. Major symptoms are paleness, shortness of newborn baby accumulates fluids, causing swollen
breath, unusually fast or strong heart beats, and arms and legs and impaired breathing.
tiredness.
Hyperbilirubinemia—A condition in which biliru-
Antibody—A protein molecule produced by the
bin accumulates to abnormally high levels in the
immune system in response to a protein that is not
bloodstream
recognized as belonging in the body.
Placenta—A protective membrane that surrounds
Antigen—A protein that can elicit an immune
and protects the fetus during pregnancy.
response in the form of antibody formation. With
regard to red blood cells, the major antigens are A, Platelet—A blood factor that is important in form-
B, O, and the Rh factor. ing blood clots.
Bilirubin—A yellow-colored end-product of hemo- Rh factor—An antigen that is found on the red
globin degradation. It is normally present at very blood cells of most people. If it is present, the blood
low levels in the bloodstream; at high levels, it pro- type is referred to as Rh-positive; if absent, the
duces jaundice. blood type is Rh-negative.
accumulate,causing hyperbilirubinemia,a condition in is Rh-positive. If the father is Rh-positive,the mother’s
which the baby becomes jaundiced. The jaundice is blood will be checked for antibodies against the Rh fac-
apparent from the yellowish tone of the baby’s eyes and tor. A test that demonstrates no antibodies is repeated at
skin. If hyperbilirubinemia cannot be controlled, the week 26 or 27 of the pregnancy. If antibodies are present,
baby develops kernicterus. The term kernicterus means treatment is begun.
that bilirubin is being deposited in the brain, possibly
In cases in which incompatibility is not identified
causing permanent damage.
before birth,the baby suffers recognizable characteristic
Other symptoms that may be present include high symptoms such as anemia, hyperbilirubinemia, and
levels of insulin and low blood sugar,as well as a condi- hydrops fetalis. The blood incompatibility is uncovered
tion called hydrops fetalis. Hydrops fetalis is character- through blood tests such as the Coombs test,which mea-
ized by an accumulation of fluids within the baby’s body, sures the level of maternal antibodies attached to the
giving it a swollen appearance. This fluid accumulation baby’s red blood cells. Other blood tests reveal anemia,
inhibits normal breathing, because the lungs cannot abnormal blood counts,and high levels of bilirubin.
expand fully and may contain fluid. If this condition con-
tinues for an extended period,it can interfere with lung
Treatment
growth. Hydrops fetalis and anemia can also contribute
to heart problems. When a mother has antibodies against her unborn
infant’s blood,the pregnancy is watched very carefully.
The antibodies are monitored and if levels increase,
Diagnosis
amniocentesis,fetal umbilical cord blood sampling,and
Erythroblastosis fetalis can be predicted before birth ultrasound are used to assess any effects on the baby.
by determining the mother’s blood type. If she is Rh-neg- Trouble is indicated by high levels of bilirubin in the
ative,the father’s blood is tested to determine whether he amniotic fluid or baby’s blood, or if the ultrasound
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1229
Erythroblastosis
fetalis
reveals hydrops fetalis. If the baby is in danger,and the If an Rh-negative woman gives birth to an Rh-posi-
pregnancy is at least 32–34 weeks along, labor is tive baby,she is given an injection of immunoglobulin G,
induced. Under 32 weeks,the baby is given blood trans- a type of antibody protein,within 72 hours of the birth.
fusions while still in the mother’s uterus. The immunoglobulin destroys any fetal blood cells in her
bloodstream before her immune system can react to
There are two techniques that are used to deliver a
them. In cases where this precaution is not taken,anti-
blood transfusionto a baby before birth. In the first,a
bodies are created and future pregnancies may be com-
needle is inserted through the mother’s abdomen and
plicated.
uterus, and into the baby’s abdomen. Red blood cells
injected into the baby’s abdominal cavity are absorbed
into its bloodstream. In early pregnancy or if the baby’s Resources
bilirubin levels are gravely high, cordocentesis is per-
BOOKS
formed. This procedure involves sliding a very fine nee-
Phibbs,Roderic H. “Hemolytic Disease of the Newborn (Ery-
dle through the mother’s abdomen and,guided by ultra- throblastosis Fetalis).”In Rudolph’s Pediatric,ed. Abra-
sound, into a vein in the umbilical cord to inject red ham M. Rudolph,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,
blood cells directly into the baby’s bloodstream. 1996.
After birth,the severity of the baby’s symptoms are PERIODICALS
assessed. One or more transfusions may be necessary to Bowman,John. “The Management of Hemolytic Disease in the
treat anemia,hyperbilirubinemia,and bleeding. Hyper- Fetus and Newborn.”Seminars in Perinatology21,no. 1
bilirubinemia is also treated with phototherapy,a treat- (Feb. 1997):39.
ment in which the baby is placed under a special light. Peterec,Steven M. “Management of Neonatal Rh Disease.”
Clinics in Perinatology22,no. 3 (Sept. 1995):561.
This light causes changes in how the bilirubin molecule
is shaped, which makes it easier to excrete. The baby
Julia Barrett
may also receive oxygen and intravenous fluids contain-
ing electrolytes or drugs to treat other symptoms.
Prognosis
In many cases of blood type incompatibility, the Erythrocyte sedimentation
symptoms of erythroblastosis fetalis are prevented with
rate
careful monitoring and blood type screening. Treatment
of minor symptoms is typically successful and the baby Definition
will not suffer long-term problems.
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR),or sedi-
Nevertheless,erythroblastosis is a very serious con-
mentation rate (sed rate),is a measure of the settling of
dition for approximately 4,000 babies annually. In about
red blood cells in a tube of blood during one hour. The
15% of cases, the baby is severely affected and dies
rate is an indication of inflammation and increases in
before birth. Babies who survive pregnancy may develop
many diseases.
kernicterus, which can lead to deafness, speech prob-
lems,cerebral palsy,or mental retardation. Extended
Purpose
hydrops fetalis can inhibit lung growth and contribute to
heart failure. These serious complications are life ESR is increased in rheumatoid diseases,most infec-
threatening,but with good medical treatment,the fatality tions,and in cancer. An advanced rate doesn’t diagnose
rate is very low. According to the U.S. Centers for Dis- a specific disease,but it does indicate that an underlying
ease Control and Prevention,there were 21 infant deaths disease may be present.
in the United States during 1996 that were attributable to A physician can use ESR to monitor a person with an
hemolytic disease (erythroblastosis fetalis) and jaundice. associated disease. When the disease worsens,the ESR
increases; when the disease improves,the ESR decreases.
Prevention The ESR doesn’t always follow the course of cancer.
With any pregnancy,whether it results in a live birth, ESR is called an acute-phase reactant test,meaning
miscarriage, stillbirth, or abortion, blood typing is a that it reacts to acute conditions in the body, such as
universal precaution against blood compatibility disease. infection or trauma. The rate increase follows a rise in
Blood types cannot be changed,but adequate forewarn- temperature and white blood cells count,peaks after sev-
ing allows precautions and treatments that limit the dan- eral days,and usually lasts longer than the elevated tem-
ger to unborn babies. perature or white blood cells count.
1230 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
etar
noitatnemides
etycorhtyrE
Precautions
KEY TERMS
The ESR should not be used to screen healthy per-
sons for disease.
Acute phase reactant—A substance in the blood
that increases as a response to an acute conditions
Description
such as infection, injury, tissue destruction, some
The ESR test is a simple test dating back to the cancers, burns, surgery, or trauma.
ancient Greeks. A specific amount of diluted,unclotted
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)—The dis-
blood is placed in a special narrow tube and left undis-
tance that red blood cells settle in a tube of blood
turbed for exactly one hour. The red cells settle towards
in one hour. It is an indication of inflammation.
the bottom of the tube,and the pale yellow liquid (plas-
Rouleaux—The stacking up of red blood cells,
ma) rises to the top. After 60 minutes,measurements are
caused by extra or abnormal proteins in the blood
taken of the distance the red cells traveled to settle at the
that decrease the normal distance red cells main-
bottom of the tube. Two methods,the Westergren and the
tain between each other.
Wintrobe, are used by laboratories; each method pro-
duces slightly different results. Most laboratories use the
Westergren method.
Normally red cells don’t settle far toward the bottom
of the tube. Many diseases make extra or abnormal pro- and rheumatoid disease,such as rheumatoid arthritis.
teins that cause the red cells to move close together,stack Many other diseases also increase the ESR:infection,kid-
up,and form a column (rouleaux). In a group,red cells ney disease,anemia,diseases involving white blood cells,
are heavier and fall faster. The faster they fall,the further cancer,and autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.
they settle,and the higher the ESR. Any disease that changes the shape and size of red
The ESR test is covered by insurance when medical- blood cells decreases the ESR. Distorted cells,such as
ly necessary. Results are usually available the same or with sickle cell disease,do not stack,and consequently
following day. do not settle far,even in the presence of an ESR-associat-
ed disease. Diseases that cause the body to make less
protein or extra red blood cells also decrease the ESR.
Preparation
This test requires 7mL–10 mL of blood. A health-
Resources
care worker ties a tourniquet on the patient’s upper arm,
locates a vein in the inner elbow region, and inserts a PERIODICALS
needle into that vein. Vacuum action draws the blood Olshaker,Jonathan S.,and David A. Jerrard. “The Erythrocyte
through the needle into an attached tube. Collection of Sedimentation Rate.”The Journal of Emergency Medicine
(Nov. 1997):869-874.
the sample takes only a few minutes.
Saadeh,Constantine. “The Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate:
Old and New Clinical Applications.”Southern Medical
Aftercare Journal(Mar. 1998) :220-255.
Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture site.
Nancy J. Nordenson
Pressure applied to the puncture site until the bleeding
stops reduces bruising. Warm packs to the puncture site
relieve discomfort. The patient may feel dizzy or faint.
Normal results Erythromycins
A normal value does not rule out disease. Normal val-
Definition
ues for the Westergren method are:Men 0 mm/hour–15
mm/hour; women 0 mm/hour–20 mm/hour; and children 0 Erythromycins are medicines that kill bacteria or
mm/hour–10 mm/hour. prevent their growth.
Abnormal results Purpose
The highest ESR levels are usually seen in a cancer Erythromycins are antibiotics, medicines used to
of a certain type of white blood cell (multiple myeloma) treat infections caused by microorganisms. Physicians
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1231
Erythromycins
prescribe these drugs for many types of infections caused could be a sign of a very serious side effect.Anyone who
by bacteria, including strep throat, sinus infections, develops severe diarrhea while taking erythromycin or
pneumonia,ear infections,tonsillitis,bronchitis,gon- related drugs should stop taking the medicine and call a
orrhea,pelvic inflammatory disease(PID),and urinary physician immediately.
tract infections. Some medicines in this group are also
used to treat Legionnaires’diseaseand ulcers caused by Special conditions
bacteria. These drugs will not work for colds, flu, and
Taking erythromycins may cause problems for peo-
other infections caused by viruses.
ple with certain medical conditions or people who are
taking certain other medicines. Before taking these
Description
drugs, be sure to let the physician know about any of
The drugs described here include erythromycins these conditions:
(Erythrocin, Ery-C, E-Mycin, and other brands) and
ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions
medicines that are chemically related to erythromycins,
to erythromycins,azithromycin,or clarithromycin in the
such as azithromycin (Zithromax) and clarithromycin
past should let his or her physician know before taking
(Biaxin). They are available only with a physician’s pre-
the drugs again. The physician should also be told about
scription and are sold in capsule, tablet (regular and
any allergiesto foods,dyes,preservatives,or other sub-
chewable),liquid,and injectable forms.
stances.
Recommended dosage PREGNANCY. Some medicines in this group may
cause problems in pregnant women and have the poten-
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
tial to cause birth defects. Women who are pregnant or
erythromycin,the strength of the medicine,and the med-
who may become pregnant should check with their
ical problem for which it is being taken. Check with the
physicians before taking these drugs.
physician who prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who
filled the prescription for the correct dosage. BREASTFEEDING. Erythromycins pass into breast
milk. Mothers who are breastfeeding and who need to
Always take erythromycins exactly as directed.
take this medicine should check with their physicians.
Never take larger, smaller, more frequent, or less fre-
quent doses. To make sure the infection clears up com- OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using ery-
pletely,it is very important to take the medicine for as thromycins,people with any of these medical problems
long as it has been prescribed. Do not stop taking the should make sure their physicians are aware of their con-
drug just because symptoms begin to improve. This is ditions:
important with all types of infections,but it is especially
•heart disease
important in “strep”infections,which can lead to serious
heart problems if they are not cleared up completely. •liver disease
Erythromycins work best when they are at constant •hearing loss
levels in the blood. To help keep levels constant,take the
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking erythromycins
medicine in doses spaced evenly through the day and
with certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs
night. Do not miss any doses. Some of these medicines
work or may increase the chance of side effects.
are most effective when taken with a full glass of water
on an empty stomach,but they may be taken with food if
stomach upset is a problem. Others work equally well Side effects
when taken with or without food. Check package direc-
The most common side effects are mild diarrhea,
tions or ask the physician or pharmacist for instructions
nausea, vomiting, and stomach or abdominal cramps.
on how to take the medicine.
These problems usually go away as the body adjusts to
the drug and do not require medical treatment. Less com-
Precautions mon side effects,such as sore mouth or tongue and vagi-
nal itchingand discharge also may occur and do not need
Symptoms should begin to improve within a few
medical attention unless they persist or are bothersome.
days of beginning to take this medicine. If they do not,or
if they get worse, check with the physician who pre- More serious side effects are not common,but may
scribed the medicine. occur. If any of the following side effects occur,check
with a physician immediately:
Erythromycins may cause mild diarrhea,that usual-
ly goes away during treatment. However,severe diarrhea •severe stomach pain,nausea,vomiting,or diarrhea
1232 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snicymorhtyrE
KEY TERMS
Bronchitis—Inflammation of the air passages of the Pneumonia—A disease in which the lungs become
lungs. inflamed. Pneumonia may be caused by bacteria,
viruses, or other organisms, or by physical or chem- Gonorrhea—A sexually transmitted disease (STD)
ical irritants.
that causes infection in the genital organs and may
cause disease in other parts of the body.
Sinus—Any of several air-filled cavities in the bones
Inflammation—Pain, redness, swelling, and heat of the skull.
that usually develop in response to injury or illness.
Legionnaire’s disease—A lung disease caused by a Strep throat—A sore throat caused by infection
bacterium. with Streptococcus bacteria. Symptoms include
sore throat, chills, fever, and swollen lymph nodes
Microorganism—An organism that is too small to
in the neck.
be seen with the naked eye.
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)—Inflammation Tonsillitis—Inflammation of a tonsil, a small mass
of the female reproductive tract, caused by any of of tissue in the throat.
several microorganisms. Symptoms include severe
abdominal pain, high fever, and vaginal discharge. Urinary tract—The passage through which urine
Severe cases can result in sterility. flows from the kidneys out of the body.
•fever •blood thinners
•skin rash,redness,or itching •disulfiram (Antabuse),used to treat alcohol abuse
•unusual tiredness or weakness •antiseizure medicines such as valproic acid (Depakote,
Depakene)
Although rare,very serious reactions to azithromycin
(Zithromax) are possible,including extreme swelling of •caffeine
the lips,face,and neck,and anaphylaxis(a violent aller-
•the antihistaminesastemizole (Hismanal)
gic reaction). Anyone who develops these symptoms after
•antiviral drugs such as (zidovudine) Retrovir
taking azithromycin should stop taking the medicine and
get immediate medical help. The list above does not include every drug that may
interact with erythromycins. Be sure to check with a
Other rare side effects may occur with erythromycins
physician or pharmacist before combining erythromycins
and related drugs. Anyone who has unusual symptoms
with any other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-
after taking these medicines should get in touch with his
counter) medicine.
or her physician.
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
Interactions
Erythropoietin see Cancer therapy,
Erythromycins may interact with many other medi-
cines. When this happens,the effects of one or both of the supportive; Immunologic therapies
drugs may change or the risk of side effects may be greater.
Anyone who takes erythromycins should let the physician
know all other medicines he or she is taking. Among the
drugs that may interact with erythromycins are:
•acetaminophen (Tylenol) Erythropoietin test
•medicine for overactive thyroid
Definition
•male hormones (androgens)
Erythropoietin,also called EPO,is a type of protein
•female hormones (estrogens)
called a glycoprotein that is formed mainly in the kid-
•other antibiotics neys to stimulate the production of red blood cells.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1233
Erythropoietin
test
cancerpatients to prevent anemia (hemoglobin concen-
KEY TERMS tration in the blood is lower than normal),or to treat ane-
mia that has been induced by chemotherapyand bone
Anemia—A condition in which the hemoglobin marrow transplantation(BMT).
concentration in the blood is below normal. The correction of anemia can result in reduced
Polycythemia vera—A condition characterized by transfusion requirements, so the erythropoietin test is
an unusually large number of red blood cells in used to diagnose anemia,including the anemia of end-
the blood due to increased production by the stage renal disease. Erythropoietin determination is also
bone marrow. Symptoms include headaches, valuable in diagnosing a condition known as poly-
blurred vision, high blood pressure, dizziness, and cythemia, when increased numbers of red blood cells
night sweats. occur. Levels of erythropoietin are extremely low in
polycythemia verabut are normal or high in secondary
Secondary polycythemia—Secondary polycythe-
polycythemia. It happens rarely,but cysts in the liver or
mia occurs when the excess of red blood cells is
kidneys,as well as tumors in the kidneys or brain,can
caused by a condition other than polycythemia
also produce erythropoietin. Patients with these condi-
vera. For example, when low levels of oxygen in the
tions can have high levels of erythropoietin and may
blood stimulate the bone marrow to produce more
develop secondary polycythemia.
red blood cells, as in chronic lung disease.
Some athletes use EPO to enhance performance,as
the increased red cell volume adds more oxygen-carrying
capacity to the blood. Adverse reactions to this practice
can include clotting abnormalities, headache, seizures,
Purpose
high blood pressure,nausea,vomiting,diarrhea,and rash.
The erythropoietin (EPO) test is used to determine if
hormonal secretion is causing changes in the red blood
Preparation
cells. The test has great value in evaluating low hemoglo-
bin (anemia),and another disorder called polycythemia, The EPO test requires a blood sample. The patient is
in which unusually large numbers of red blood cells are to fast with nothing to eat or drink for at least eight hours
found in the blood. The EPO test is also used to identify before the test. It is also suggested that the patient lie
kidney tumors and to evaluate abuse by athletes who down for 30 minutes before the test.
believe commercially prepared erythropoietin enhances
performance.
Risks
Risks for this test are minimal, but may include
Precautions
slight bleeding from the blood-drawing site,faintingor
Not every laboratory is equipped to evaluate EPO, feeling lightheaded after venipuncture, and hematoma
so the reference laboratory (a large commercial lab that (blood accumulating under the puncture site).
does tests for hospitals not equipped to do them) per-
forming the test may require as many as four days to
Normal results
complete the analysis. It should also be noted that EPO
values increase in pregnancy, in which significantly Reference values vary from laboratory to laboratory,
higher levels are found before the twenty-fourth week. but a general normal range is 11–48 mU/ml (milliunits
per milliliter).
Description
Abnormal results
Erythropoietin is produced primarily in the kidneys
but interacts with other factors in the bone marrow to Low levels of EPO are found in anemic patients with
increase red cell production. EPO is unique among the inadequate or absent production of erythropoietin.
blood cell growth factors,because it is the only one that Severe kidney disease may decrease production of EPO,
behaves like a hormone. and congenital absence of EPO can occur.
Erythropoietin acts as the principal regulator in the Elevated levels of EPO can be found in some ane-
production of red blood cells (erythrocytes) by control- miaswhen the body tries to overcompensate for reduced
ling the number,the kinds,and the survival of the cells. blood volume. Elevated levels are also seen in poly-
Because of this ability,it is being investigated for use in cythemia,and erythropoietin-secreting tumors.
1234 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tset
niteioporhtyrE
Resources some instances gangrenein the colon. Other known E.
coli-causing infections may include chronic renal failure,
BOOKS
pancreatitis,and diabetes mellitus. Some neurological
Cahill,Mathew. Handbook of Diagnostic Tests.Springhouse,
symptoms such as drowsiness, seizure and coma may
PA:Springhouse Corporation,1995.
occur. In infants,E. coliinfections are present in cases of
Jacobs,David S.,et al. Laboratory Test Handbook.4th ed. New
York:Lexi-Comp Inc.,1996. infantile gastroenteritis and neonatal meningitis.
Pagana,Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
Strains of E. colithat produce diarrhea were initially
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis:Mosby,Inc.,1998.
distinguished by their O (somatic) antigens found on the
bacterial surface. Although there is an overlap in charac-
Janis O. Flores
teristics between strains,they may be classified into four
main groups; enterohemorrahagic (0157),enteropatho-
ESB see Electrical stimulation of the brain
genic (055,0111), enterotoxigenic (06,078), and
enteroinvasive (0124,0164).
E.coli O157 (VTEC)
Escherichia coli The O157:H7 strain is the member of the group most
often associated with a particularly severe form of diar-
Definition rhea. (The O indicates the somatic antigen,while the H
denotes the flagellar antigen,both of which are found on
E. coli (Escherichia coli)is one of several types of
the cell surface of the bacteria.) The bacterium was dis-
bacteria that normally inhabit the intestine of humans
covered in 1977,and first reports of infections followed in
and animals (commensal organism). Some strains of E.
1982. E. coliO157:H7,as it is frequently referred to by
coli are capable of causing disease under certain condi-
researchers, causes bloody diarrhea in many infected
tions when the immune system is compromised or dis-
patients. It accounts for about 2% of all cases of diarrhea
ease may result from an environmental exposure.
in the western world, and at least one-third of cases of
hemorrhagic colitis,or about 20,000 cases per year
Description
E. coliO157:H7 is also the most common cause of
E. coli bacteria may give rise to infections in
unique syndromes, known as the Hemolytic-Uremic
wounds,the urinary tract,biliary tract,and abdominal
Syndrome(HUS) and thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP),
cavity (peritonitis). This organism may cause sep-
which causes kidney failure, hemolytic anemia, and
ticemia,neonatal meningitis,infantile gastroenteritis,
thrombocytopenia. Usually,infection with this strain of
tourist diarrhea,and hemorrhagic diarrhea. An E. coli
bacteria will subside without further complications.
infection may also arise due to environmental exposure.
However, about 5% of people who are infected will
Infections with this type of bacteria pose a serious threat
develop HUS/TTP. This infection also accounts for the
to public health with outbreaks arising from food and
majority of episodes of HUS,especially in children.
water that has been contaminated with human or animal
feces or sewage. This type of bacteria has been used as a This strain of bacteria produces a potent toxin called
biological indicator for safety of drinking water since the verotoxin,named for toxin’s ability to kill green monkey
1890s. Exposure may also occur during hospitalization, kidney or “vero”cells. Bacteria that produce verotoxin
resulting in pneumonia in immunocompromised are referred to as Verotoxin-producing E. coli(VTEC).
patients or those on a ventilator The numbers of bacteria that are necessary to reproduce
infectious levels of bacteria are quite small,estimated at
10-100 viable bacteria. These toxins are lethal for intesti-
Causes and symptoms
nal cells and those that line vessels (endothelial cells),
The symptoms of infection and resulting complica- inhibiting protein synthesis causing cell death. It is
tions are dependent upon the strain of E. coliand the site believed that the damage to blood vessels results in the
of infection. These bacteria produce toxins that have a formation of clots, which eventually leads to the
wide range of effects. Symptoms caused by some E. coli Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome. HUS/TTP is a serious,
infections range from mild to severe, bloody diarrhea, often fatal,syndrome that has other causes in addition to
acute abdominal pain, vomiting, and fever. Gastroin- E. coliO157:H7; it is characterized by the breaking up of
testinal complications that can cause E. coliinfections red blood cells (hemolysis) and kidney failure (uremia).
include irritable bowel syndrome(IBS) ischemic coli- The syndrome occurs most often in the very young and
tis,appendicitis,perforation of the large bowel,and in very old.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1235
Escherichia
coli
disease. Strain OH111 was found to be involved in out-
breaks in Australia,Japan,and Italy. The O128,O103,
and O55 groups have also been implicated in diarrhea
outbreaks. In Britain,cases of infantile gastroenteritis in
maternity hospitals and neonatal units have been attrib-
uted to the E. colinon-0157 group. Many of these organ-
isms have been identified in cattle.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli
Two toxins may be produced by this group,the heat-
labile enterotoxin (LT) that can produce enteritis in
infants,and a heat stable enterotoxin (ST),the action of
which has yet to be determined.
Enteroinvasive E. coli
Some strains of the enteroinvasive E. colihave been
involved in the development of gastroenteritis in infants.
These organisms do not produce and enterotoxin. The
cells of the intestine are affected,with the development
E. coli O157:H7 is commonly found in cattle and of symptoms that are typical of a shigellae infection.
poultry,and outbreaks have of disease have been associ-
ated with cattle and bovine products. There are reports of
Diagnosis
contamination from unpasteurized apple juice,hamburg-
er meat,radish sprouts,lettuce,and potatoes,as well as Diagnosis of a specific type of infection is depen-
other food sources. Environmental contamination may dant upon the characteristics of the particular strain of
occur in water drained from cattle pastures or water con- the organism.
taining human sewage used for drinking or swimming.
Human to human transmission, through contact with E. coli O157:H7 (HUS)
fecal matter,has also been identified in daycare centers.
This particular strain of E. coli is suspected when
After an incubation period of three to four days on bloody diarrhea, bloody stools, lack of fever, elevated
average,watery diarrhea begins,which rapidly progresses leukocyte count,and abdominal tenderness are present.
to bloody diarrhea in many victims, in which case the Stool cultures are used to tentatively identify the bacteria.
bowel movement may be mostly blood. Nausea,vomit- Unfortunately,cultures are often negative or inconclusive
ing,and low-grade fever are also frequently present. Gas- if done after 48 hours of symptoms. Further tests are usu-
trointestinal symptoms last for about one week, and ally needed,however,for confirmation of infection. This
recovery is often spontaneous. Symptomatic infection may include a full blood count,blood film,and tests to
may occur in about 10% of infected individuals. About 5- determine urea,electrolyte,and LDH (lactate dehydroge-
10% of individuals,usually at the extremes of age or ele- nase) levels. Damaged red blood cells,and elevated levels
vated leukocyte count,develop HUS/TTP,and ultimately, of creatinine, urea, and LDH with a drop in platelet
kidney failure. Patients taking antibioticsor medications countmay indicate that HUS will develop. Immunomag-
for gastric acidity may also be at risk. Neurological symp- netic separation is now being used for diagnosis as well.
toms can also occur as part of HUS/TTP and consist of
seizures,paralysis,and coma. Rectal prolapsemay also E. coli non-O157 (VTEC)
be a complication,and in some cases colitis,appendicitis,
Diagnosis is often difficult for these types of bacteria,
perforation of the large bowel,and gangrene in the bowel.
but production of enterohemolysin (Ehly) is used as an
Systemically,the most prevalent complications of E. coli
indicator. Other diagnostic tests are used to detect vero-
157 infections are HUS and TTP.
toxins,including ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assays),colony immunoblotting,and DNA-based tests.
E. coli non-O157 (VTEC)
E. coli 0157 STEC
These strains of E. coliproduce verotoxin,but are
strains other than O157. There have been as many as one Methods for detection of this type of bacteria are
hundred different types implicated in the development of under development, including culture growth media
1236 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
iloc
aihcirehcsE
A magnified image of the E.colibacterium.(The Stock Mar-
ket.Reproduced by permission.)
selective for this organism. Immunomagnetic separation
and specific ELISA, latex agglutination tests, colony KEY TERMS
immunoblot assays, and other immunological-based
detection methods are being explored. Antigen—A substance, usually a protein, that
causes the formation of an antibody and reacts
Treatment specifically with that antibody.
Uncomplicated cases of the E. coli O157:H7 the Anti-motility medications—Medications such as
infection clear up within ten days. It is not certain that loperamide (Imodium), dephenoxylate (Lomotil),
antibiotics are helpful in treating E. coli O157:H7 and or medications containing Codeine or narcotics
there is some evidence that they may be harmful. Dehy- which decrease the ability of the intestine to con-
drationresulting from diarrhea must be treated with either tract. This can worsen the condition of a patient
Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS) or intravenous fluids. with dysentery or colitis.
Anti-motility agents that decrease the intestines’ability to
Colitis—Inflammation of the colon or large intes-
contract, should not be used in any patient with bloody
tine, usually causing diarrhea which may be bloody.
diarrhea. Treatment of HUS,if it develops,involves cor-
Food irradiation methods—A process using radi-
rection of clotting factors,plasma exchange,and kidney
ant energy to kill microogranisms in food, to
dialysis. Blood transfusions may be required. Treatment
extend the amount of time in that food can be sold
methods for other E. coliinfections are similar. Antibiotics
and eaten safely.
are often used in the treatment of E. coliinfections,but
their role is controversial. Some antibiotics may enhance Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS)—A liquid
the development of HUS/TTP depending upon their preparation developed by the World Health Orga-
action,as well as the use of anti diarrhea medications that nization that can decrease fluid loss in persons
should be avoided. Phosphoenolpyruvate analogues may with diarrhea. Originally developed to be pre-
be helpful. Gentamicin,ampicillin,ceftazidime,or beta- pared with materials available in the home, com-
lactamase-stable cephalosporin may be administered for mercial preparations have recently come into use.
neonatal meningitis. Antibiotic therapy is further compli-
Urea—Chemical formed during the body’s metab-
cated by the presence of antibiotic resistant organisms.
olism of nitrogen and normally excreted by the
kidney. Urea levels rise in the blood when kidney
Alternative treatment
failure occurs.
Studies have been conducted to determine if diar-
rhea symptoms can be reduced by alternative therapies
such as the consumption of herbal teas, psyllium, and
acupuncture. Patients should consult their doctors effective way to avoid infection. More studies are needed
before using any alternative treatments,as E. colican be to determine the appropriate safety margins for killing
life threatening and should be closely monitored. these bacteria. Food irradiation methods are also being
developed to sanitize food. Vaccinations to E. coli0157
Prognosis are under development,as are medications aimed at lim-
iting the effects of the verotoxin. The enforcement of
In most cases of O157:H7,symptoms last for about a
regulations for meat production and water are critical.
week and recovery is often spontaneous. Ten percent of
Steam pasteurization is used in the United States and is
individuals with E. coliO157:H7 infection develop HUS;
being explored in other countries.
5% of those will die of the disease. Some who recover
from HUS will be left with some degree of kidney dam- Prevention of E. coligastroenteritis in infants is best
age and possibly irritable bowel syndrome. Additionally, achieved by breast-feeding. The breast milk contains anti-
there is a possibility of chronic E. coliinfection. bodies that combat the infection. For bottle-fed infants,
care should be taken in the preparation of the milk and
Infants that develop E. coliinfections may be perma-
bottles. Good hygiene of the umbilical cord area is impor-
nently affected. Gastroenteritis may leave the child with
tant. Keeping this area clean and dry may reduce infection.
lactose intolerance. Neonates developing meningitis from
E. colistrains have a high morbidity and mortality rate
Resources
Prevention
BOOKS
Thorough cooking of all meat and poultry products Hamer,Davidson H.,and Sherwood L. Gorbach. “Escherichia
and adhering to proper food preparation is the most coli.”In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1237
Escherichia
coli
Liver Disease,ed. by Mark Feldman,et al. Philadelphia: This condition usually occurs with tracheoesophageal
W.B. Saunders Company,1997. fistula,a condition in which the esophagus is improperly
Shanson,D. C. Microbiology in Clinical Practice. attached to the trachea,the nearby tube that connects the
Woburn:Butterworth-Heinemann,1999. nasal area to the lungs. Esophageal atresia occurs in
Sleigh,J. Douglas,and Morag Timbury. Note on Medical Bac-
approximately 1 in 4,000 live births.
teriology.Edinburch:Chruchill Lingstone,1998.
Thielman,Nathan M.,and Richard L. Guerrant. “Food-Borne
Illness.”In Conn’s Current Therapy,1996,ed. by Robert
Description
E. Rakel. Philadelphia:W.B. Saunders Company,1996.
Wolfe,Martin S. “Acute Infectious Diarrhea.”In Conn’s Cur- Failure of an unborn child (fetus) to develop proper-
rent Therapy,1996,ed. by Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia: ly results in birth defects. Many of these defects involve
W.B. Saunders Company,1996.
organs that do not function,or function only incidentally,
PERIODICALS before birth,and,as a result,go undetected until the baby
Bender,Jeffery B.,et al. “Surveillance for Escherichia coli is born. In this case,the digestive tract is unnecessary for
O157:H7 Infections in Minnesota by Molecular Subtyping.” fetal growth,since all nutritioncomes from the mother
New England Journal of Medicine337,no. (6)(1997):388. through the placenta and umbilical cord.
Chart,H.,M. Sussman,and D. E. S. Stewart-Tull,eds. “ E. coli-
During fetal development,the esophagus and the tra-
Friend or Foe?”Journal of Applied MicrobiologyThe Soci-
ety for Applied Microbiology Symposium Series No. 29. chea arise from the same original tissue. Normally,the
Long K.,E. Vasquez-Garibay,J. Mathewson,J. de la Cabada,and two tubes would form separately (differentiate); howev-
H. DuPont. “The Impact of Infant Feeding Patterns on Infec- er,in cases of esphageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
tion and Diarrheal Disease Due to Enterotoxigenic fistulas,they do not,resulting in various malformed con-
Escherichia coli.”Salud Publica Mex(July/Aug. 1999):263- figurations. The most common configuration is the “C”
70. type,in which the upper part of the esophagus abruptly
Rondeau,Eric,and Marie-Noëlle Peraldi. “Escherichia coli
ends in a blind pouch,while the lower part attaches itself
and the Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome.”New England
to the trachea. This configuration occurs in 85–90% of
Journal of Medicine335 (1996):660.
cases. Esophageal atresia without involvement of the tra-
“Traveler’s Diarrhea:Don’t Let It Ruin Your Trip.”Mayo Clin-
chea occurs in only 8% of cases.
ic Health Letter(Jan. 1997).
ORGANIZATION
Division of Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases. National Center Causes and symptoms
for Infectious Diseases Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. 1600 Clifton Road,Mailstop C09 Atlanta, The cause of esophageal atresia, like that of most
Georgia 30333. 21 May,2001 <http://www.cdc.gov>. birth defects,is unknown.
OTHER An infant born with this defect will at first appear all
“Preventing Foodborne Illness:Escherichia coli0157:H7.”(9 right, swallowing normally. However, the blind pouch
August 1996). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, will begin to fill with mucus and saliva that would nor-
<http://www.cdc. gov/ncidod/dbmd/diseaseinfo/escherichia mally pass through the esophagus to the stomach. These
coli_g.htm>. (30 May 2000).
secretions back up into the mouth and nasal area,causing
Jill Granger the baby to drool excessively. When fed, the baby will
David Kaminstein also immediately regurgitate what he or she has eaten.
Choking and coughing may also occur as the baby
Esophageal acidity test see Esophageal breaths in the fluid backing up from the esophagus. Aspi-
function tests ration pneumonia,an infection of the respiratory system
caused by inhalation of the contents of the digestive tract,
Esophageal aperistalsis see Achalasia
may also develop.
Diagnosis
Esophageal atresia Physicians who suspect esophageal atresia after
being presented with the above symptoms diagnose the
Definition
condition using x-ray imaging or by passing a catheter
Esophageal atresia is a serious birth defect in which through the nose and into the esophagus. Esophageal
the esophagus,the long tube that connects the mouth to atresia is indicated if the catheter hits an obstruction 4–5
the stomach, is segmented and closed off at any point. in (10–13 cm) from the nostrils.
1238 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aiserta
laegahposE
along which food and liquid travel from the throat to
KEY TERMS the stomach.
Fetal—Refers to the fetus, also known in the first
Description
two months after conception as an embryo.
Esophageal cancer usually originates in the inner
Fistula—Unnatural connection between two hol-
layers of the lining of the esophagus and grows outward.
low organs or one organ and the outside.
In time,the tumor can obstruct the passage of food and
liquid, making swallowing painful and difficult. Since
most patients are not diagnosed until the late stages of
the disease, esophageal cancer is associated with poor
Treatment
quality of life and low survival rates.
Infants with esophageal atresia are unlikely to survive Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common type
without surgery to reconnect the esophagus. The procedure of esophageal cancer, accounting for 95% of all
is done as soon as possible; however, prematurity, the esophageal cancers worldwide. The esophagus is nor-
presence of other birth defects,or complications of apira- mally lined with thin,flat squamous cells that resemble
tion pneumonia may delay surgery. Once diagnosed,the tiny roof shingles. Squamous cell carcinoma can develop
baby will be fed intraveneously until he or she has recov- at any point along the esophagus but is most common in
ered sufficiently from the operation. Mucus and saliva will the middle portion.
also be continuously removed via a catheter until recovery
Adenocarcinoma has surpassed squamous cell carci-
has occured. When surgery is performed,the esophagus is
noma as the most common type of esophageal cancer in
reconnected and,if neccessary,separated from the trachea.
the United States. Adenocarcinoma originates in glandu-
If the two ends of the esophagus are too far apart to be reat-
lar tissue not normally present in the lining of the esoph-
tached,tissue from the large intestine is used to join them.
agus. Before adenocarcinoma can develop, glandular
cells must replace a section of squamous cells. This
Prognosis occurs in Barrett’s esophagus,a precancerous condition
in which chronic acid reflux from the stomach stimulates
Surgery to correct esophageal atresia is usually suc-
a transformation in cell type in the lower portion of the
cessful. Post-operative complications may include diffi-
esophagus.
culty swallowing,since the esophagus may not contract
efficiently, and gastrointestinal reflux, in which the A very small fraction of esophageal cancers are
acidic contents of stomach back up into the lower part of melanomas,sarcomas,or lymphomas.
the esophagus,possibly causing ulcers.
There is great variability in the incidence of
esophageal cancer with regard to geography,ethnicity,
Resources and gender. The overall incidence is increasing. About
13,000 new cases of esophageal cancer are diagnosed in
BOOKS
the United States each year. During the same 12-month
“Atresia and Tracheoesophageal Fistula.”In Nelson Textbook of
Pediatrics,ed. Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B. period, 12,000 people die of this disease. It strikes
Saunders Co.,1996. between five and ten North Americans per 100,000. In
Long,John D.,and Roy Orlando. “Anatomy and Development some areas of China the cancer is endemic.
and Acquired Anomalies of the Esophagus.”In Sleisenger
Squamous cell carcinoma usually occurs in the sixth
& Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark
or seventh decade of life, with a greater incidence in
Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1998.
African-Americans than in others. Adenocarcinoma
develops earlier and is much more common in white
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
patients. In general,esophageal cancer occurs more fre-
quently in men than in women.
Esophageal cancer Causes and symptoms
The exact cause of esophageal cancer is unknown,
Definition
although many investigators believe that chronic irrita-
Esophageal canceris a malignancy that develops tion of the esophagus is a major culprit. Most of the iden-
in tissues of the hollow, muscular canal (esophagus) tified risk factors represent a form of chronic irritation.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1239
Esophageal
cancer
However, the wide variance in the distribution of Symptoms
esophageal cancer among different demographic groups
Unfortunately, symptoms generally don’t appear
raises the possibility that genetic factors also play a role.
until the tumor has grown so large that the patient cannot
be cured. Dysphagia (trouble swallowing or a sensation
Several risk factors are associated with esophageal
of having food stuck in the throat or chest) is the most
cancer.
common symptom. Swallowing problems may occur
•Tobacco and alcohol consumption are the major risk occasionally at first, and patients often react by eating
factors,especially for squamous cell carcinoma. Smok- more slowly and chewing their food more carefully and,
ing and alcohol abuse each increase the risk of squa- as the tumor grows, switching to soft foods or a liquid
mous cell carcinoma by five-fold. The effects of the diet. Without treatment, the tumor will eventually pre-
two are synergistic,in that the combination of smoking vent even liquid from passing into the stomach. A sensa-
and alchohol increases the risk by 25- to 100- fold. It is tion of burning or slight mid-chest pressure is a rare,
estimated that drinking about 13 ounces of alcohol often-disregarded symptom of esophageal cancer.
every day for an extended period of time raises the risk Painful swallowing is usually a symptom of a large
of developing esophageal cancer by 18%. That likeli- tumor obstructing the opening of the esophagus. It can
hood increases to 44% in individuals who also smoke lead to regurgitation of food,weight loss,physical wast-
one or two packs of cigarettes a day. Smokeless tobacco ing, and malnutrition. Anyone who has trouble swal-
also increases the risk for esophageal cancer. lowing, loses a significant amount of weight without
dieting,or cannot eat solid food because it is too painful
•Gastroesophageal reflux is a condition in which acid to swallow should see a doctor.
from the stomach refluxes backwards into the lower
portion of the esophagus,sometimes causing symptoms
Diagnosis
of heartburn. In some cases of gastroesophageal
reflux,the chronic exposure to acid causes the inner lin- A barium swallow is usually the first test performed
ing of the lower esophagus to change from squamous on a patient whose symptoms suggest esophageal cancer.
cells to glandular cells. This is called Barrett’s esopha- After the patient swallows a small amount of barium, a
gus. Patients with Barrett’s esophagus are roughly 30 to series of x rays can highlight any bumps or flat raised
40 times more likely than the general population to areas on the normally smooth surface of the esophageal
develop adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. wall. It can also detect large,irregular areas that narrow
the esophagus in patients with advanced cancer,but it can-
•A diet low in fruits, vegetables, zinc, riboflavin, and
not provide information about disease that has spread
other vitamins can increase risk of developing to beyond the esophagus. A double contrast study is a barium
esophageal cancer.
swallow with air blown into the esophagus to improve the
way the barium coats the esophageal lining. Endoscopy is
•Caustic injury to the esophagus inflicted by swallowing
a diagnostic procedure in which a thin lighted tube (endo-
lye or other substances that damage esophageal cells can
scope) is passed through the mouth,down the throat,and
lead to the development of squamous cell esophageal
into the esophagus. Cells that appear abnormal are
cancer in later life.
removed for biopsy. Once a diagnosis of esophageal can-
cer has been confirmed through biopsy,staging tests are
•Achalasia is a condition in which the lower esophageal
performed to determine whether the disease has spread
sphincter (muscle) cannot relax enough to let food pass
(metastasized) to tissues or organs near the original tumor
into the stomach. Squamous cell esophageal cancer
or in other parts of the body. These tests may include com-
develops in about 6% of patients with achalasia.
puted tomography,endoscopic ultrasound,thoracoscopy,
•Tylosis is a rare inherited disease characterized by laparoscopy,and positron emission tomography.
excess skin on the palms and soles. Affected patients
have a much higher probability of developing
Treatment
esophageal cancer than the general population. They
should have regular screenings to detect the disease in Treatment for esophageal cancer is determined by the
its early,most curable stages. stage of the disease and the patient’s general health. The
most important distinction to make is whether the cancer
•Esophageal webs,which are protrusions of tissue into is curable. If the cancer is in the early stages,cure may be
the esophagus,and diverticula,which are outpouchings possible. If the cancer is advanced or if the patient will
of the wall of the esophagus,are associated with a high- not tolerate major surgery,treatment is usually directed at
er incidence of esophageal cancer. palliation (relief of symptoms only) instead of cure.
1240 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnac
laegahposE
Staging
Stage 0 is the earliest stage of the disease. Cancer
cells are confined to the innermost lining of the esopha-
gus. Stage I esophageal cancer has spread slightly deep-
er, but still has not extended to nearby tissues, lymph
nodes,or other organs. In Stage IIA,cancer has invaded
the thick,muscular layer of the esophagus that propels
food into the stomach and may involve connective tissue
covering the outside of the esophagus. In Stage IIB,can-
cer has spread to lymph nodes near the esophagus and
may have invaded deeper layers of esophageal tissue.
Stage III esophageal cancer has spread to tissues or
lymph nodes near the esophagus or to the trachea (wind-
pipe) or other organs near the esophagus. Stage IV can-
cer has spread to distant organs like the liver,bones,and
brain. Recurrent esophageal cancer is disease that devel-
ops in the esophagus or another part of the body after ini-
ation is effective in relieving dysphagia in patients who
tial treatment.
cannot be cured. However,radiation is most useful when
combined with chemotherapy as either the definitive
Surgery
treatment or preoperative treatment.
The most common operations for the treatment of
esophageal cancer are esophagectomy and esophagogas- Palliation
trectomy. Esophagectomy is the removal of the cancer-
In addition to surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation,
ous part of the esophagus and nearby lymph nodes. This
other palliative measures can provide symptomatic relief.
procedure is performed only on patients with very early
Dilatation of the narrowed portion of the esophagus with
cancer that has not spread to the stomach. Esophagogas-
soft tubes can provide short-term relief of dysphagia. Place-
trectomy is the removal of the cancerous part of the
ment of a flexible,self-expanding stent within the narrowed
esophagus, nearby lymph nodes, and the upper part of
portion is also useful in allowing more food intake.
the stomach. The resected esophagus is replaced with the
stomach or parts of intestine so the patient can swallow.
Follow-up treatments
These procedures can significantly relieve symptoms and
improve the nutritional status of more than 80% of Regular barium swallows and other imaging studies
patients with dysphagia. Although surgery can cure some are necessary to detect recurrence or spread of disease or
patients whose disease has not spread beyond the esoph- new tumor development.
agus, but more than 75% of esophageal cancers have
spread to other organs before being diagnosed. Less
Alternative treatment
extensive surgical procedures can be used for palliation.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) involves intravenously
Chemotherapy injecting a drug that is absorbed by cancer cells and kills
them after they are exposed to specific laser beams. PDT
Oral or intravenous chemotherapy alone will not
can be used for palliation,but it also cured some early
cure esophageal cancer,but pre-operative treatments can
esophageal cancers during preliminary studies.
shrink tumors and increase the probability that cancer
Researchers are comparing its benefits with those of
can be surgically eradicated. Palliative chemotherapy can
more established therapies.
relieve symptoms of advanced cancer but will not alter
Endoscopic laser therapy involves delivering short,
the outcome of the disease.
powerful laser treatments to the tumor through an endo-
scope. It can improve dysphagia,but multiple treatments
Radiation
are required,and the benefit is seldom long-lasting.
External beam or internal radiation, delivered by
machine or implanted near cancer cells inside the body,
Prognosis
is only rarely used as the primary form of treatment.
Post-operative radiation is sometimes used to kill cancer Since most patients are diagnosed when the cancer
cells that couldn’t be surgically removed. Palliative radi- has spread to lymph nodes or other structures,the prog-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1241
Esophageal
cancer
A close-up view of a cancerous esophageal tumor.(Custom
Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Esophageal diverticula see Esophageal
KEY TERMS pouches
Computed tomography—A radiology test by
which images of cross-sectional planes of the
body are obtained.
Endoscopic ultrasound—A radiology test utilizing
high frequency sound waves, conducted via an Esophageal function tests
endoscope.
Definition
Laparoscopy—Examination of the contents of the
abdomen through a thin, lighted tube passed The esophagus is the swallowing tube through
through a small incision. which food passes on its way from the mouth to the
stomach. The main function of this organ is to propel
Positron emission tomography—A radiology test
food down into the stomach. There is also a mechanism
by which images of cross-sectional planes of the
to prevent food from coming back up or “refluxing”from
body are obtained, utilizing the properties of the
the stomach into the esophagus. Esophageal function
positron. The positron is a subatomic particle of
tests are used to determine if these processes are normal
equal mass to the electron, but of opposite charge.
or abnormal.
Synergistic—The combined action of two or more
processes is greater than the sum of each acting
separately. Purpose
Thoracoscopy—Examination of the contents of the The esophagus is a long,muscular tube that also has
chest through a thin, lighted tube passed through a two muscles (or sphincters) at the top and bottom. All of
small incision. these muscular areas must contract in an exact sequence
for swallowing to proceed normally. There are three
main symptoms that occur when esophageal function is
abnormal:difficulty with swallowing (dysphagia),heart-
nosis for esophageal cancer is poor. Generally,no more burn,and chest pain.
than half of all patients are candidates for curative treat-
Doctors perform a variety of tests to evaluate these
ment. Even if cure is attempted,the cancer can recur.
symptoms. Endoscopy,which is not a test of esophageal
function,is often used to determine if the lining of the
Prevention
esophagus has any ulcers,tumors,or areas of narrowing
There is no known way to prevent esophageal cancer. (strictures). Many times,however,endoscopy only shows
the doctor if there is injury to the esophageal lining,and
the procedure gives no information about the cause of the
Resources
problem.
BOOKS
Therefore,in addition to endoscopy,several studies
Heitmiller,Richard F.,Arlene A. Forastiere,and Lawrence R.
Kleinberg. “Esophagus.”In Clinical Oncology. 2nd ed. are available that measure esophageal function. There are
Ed. Martin D. Abeloff. New York:Churchill Livingstone, three basic types of tests used to assess esophageal func-
2000. tion:
Zwischenberger,Joseph B.,Scott K. Alpard,and Mark B.
•Manometry is used to study the way the muscles of the
Orringer. “Esophageal Cancer.”In Sabiston Textbook of
esophagus contract,and is most useful for the investi-
Surgery. by Courtney Townsend Jr.,16th ed. Ed. Philadel-
gation of difficulty with swallowing.
phia:W. B. Saunders Company,2001.
•Esophageal pH monitoring measures changes in
ORGANIZATIONS
esophageal acidity, and is valuable for evaluating
American Cancer Society. “Esophageal Cancer.”6 July
2001.<http:// www3.cancer.org>. patients with heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux dis-
National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship. 1010 Wayne ease (GERD).
Avenue,5th Floor,Suite 300,Silver Spring,MD 20910.
•X-ray studies investigate swallowing difficulties. They
(888) 650-9127.
either follow the progress of barium during swallowing
Maureen Haggerty using a fluoroscope,or they use radioactive scanning
Kevin O. Hwang,M.D. techniques.
1242 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stset
noitcnuf
laegahposE
Precautions patients and doctors. pH monitoring is usually performed
before surgery to confirm the diagnosis and to judge the
Pregnant patients undergoing x-ray exams should
effects of drug therapy.
carefully review the risks and benefits with their doctors.
Most x-ray exams of the gastrointestinal tract do not
X-ray tests
involve radiation levels that are harmful to the unborn baby.
These fall into two categories:(1) those done with
the use of barium and a fluoroscope; and (2) those per-
Description
formed with radioactive materials.
Manometry Studies performed with fluoroscopy are of greatest
value in identifying a structural abnormality of the esoph-
This study is designed to measure the pressure
agus. Although this is not truly an esophageal function
changes produced by contraction of the muscular por-
test, it does allow doctors to consider other diagnostic
tions of the esophagus. An abnormality in the function of
possibilities. Often a sandwich or marshmallow coated
any one of the segments of the swallowing tube causes
with barium is used to identify the site of an obstruction.
difficulty in swallowing. Doctors call this symptom dys-
phagia. This exam is most useful in evaluating those During fluoroscopy,the radiologist can observe the
patients whose endoscopy is negative. passage of material through the esophagus in real time,
and video recordings can also be done. This is particularly
During manometry,the patient swallows a thin tube
useful when the swallowing symptoms appear to involve
carrying a device that senses changes in pressures in the
mainly the upper region of the esophagus. The most com-
esophagus. Readings are taken at rest and during swal-
mon cause of swallowing difficulties is a previous stroke,
lowing. Medications are sometimes given during the
although other diseases of the neuromuscular system (like
study to help in the diagnosis. The results are then trans-
myasthenia gravis) can produce the same symptoms.
mitted to recording equipment. Manometry can best
identify diseases that produce disturbances of motility or Scans using low-dose radioactive materials are use-
contractions of the esophagus. ful because they are able not only to demonstrate that
food passes through the esophagus more slowly than nor-
mal,but also how slow. These studies involve swallow-
Esophageal pH monitoring
ing food coated with material that is followed by a
This procedure involves measuring the esophagus’ nuclear medicine scanner. Scans are best used when
exposure to acid that has “refluxed” from the stomach. other methods have failed to make a diagnosis,or if it is
The test is ideal for evaluating recurring heartburn or necessary to determine the degree of the abnormality. As
GERD. Too much acid produces not only heartburn,but of 1997,scans mainly served as research tools.
also ulcers that can bleed or produce areas of narrowing
(strictures) when they heal. Preparation
Normally,acid refluxes into the esophagus in only Patients should not eat or drink for several hours
small amounts for short periods of time. A muscle called before the exam. Many medications affect the esopha-
the lower esophageal sphincter prevents excessive reflux. gus; doses sometimes need to be adjusted or even
Spontaneous contractions that increase esophageal emp- stopped for a while. Patients must inform doctors of all
tying and production of saliva are other important protec- medications taken,including over-the-counter medica-
tive mechanisms. tions (purchased without a doctor’s prescription), and
any known allergies.
“pH”is the scientific term that tells just how acidic or
alkaline a substance is. Researchers have shown that in the
Aftercare
esophagus,the presence of acid is damaging only if it per-
sists for prolonged periods. Therefore,the test has been For most of these studies,no special care is needed
designed to monitor the level of acidity over 24 hours,usu- after the procedure. Patients can often go about normal
ally in the home. In this way,patients maintain their daily daily activities following any of these tests. One excep-
routine,documenting their symptoms,and at what point in tion is for those who undergo an x-ray exam with the use
their activities they occurred. During this period, a thin of barium. This can have a constipating effect and
tube with a pH monitor remains in the esophagus to record patients should ask about using a mild laxative later on.
changes. After the study,a computer is used to compare
changes in acidity with symptoms reported by the patient. Risks
Surgery is an effective and long-lasting treatment for Exposure of a fetus to x rays,especially in the first
symptoms of recurrent reflux and is the choice of many three months,is a potential risk.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1243
Esophageal
function
tests
Other studies of esophageal function are essen-
tially free of any significant risk. The tubes passed Esophageal pouches
during these procedures are small, and most patients
Definition
adjust to them quite well. However,since medications
cannot be used to relax patients,some may not tolerate Esophageal pouches, also known as esophageal
the exam. diverticula,are pocket-like structures formed when the
interior space of the esophagus, the tube that connects
the mouth to the stomach,protrudes into the walls that
Abnormal results
surround it.
Manometry is used to diagnose abnormalities relat-
ed to contraction or relaxation of the various muscular
Description
regions of the esophagus. These studies cannot distin-
guish whether injury to either the muscle or nerves of the The esophagus is a muscular tube that propels food
esophagus is producing the abnormal results. Only the into the stomach. A defect in the wall of the esophagus
final effect on esophageal muscle is identified. Results may allow the lining to herniate,creating a space where
should be interpreted in light of the patient’s entire med- food can be caught. Pouches can appear anywhere
ical history. between the throat and the stomach. They occur primari-
ly in men and usually later in life.
For example, there are many diseases that cause
poor relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter. When Different names for the condition apply to different
no cause is found,the disease is called achalasia. locations along the esophagus:
Abnormal results of pH tests can confirm symptoms •Zenker’s diverticula are pharyngeal pouches, or ones
of heartburn or indicate a cause of chest pain (or rarely, that occur in the upper neck area at the top of the esoph-
swallowing difficulties). Doctors may want to start or agus.
change medications based on these results,or even repeat •Traction diverticula are a type of mid-esophageal
the test using different doses of medication. As noted pouch.
above,these studies are indicated before surgical treat-
•Epiphrenic diverticula occur at the bottom of the esoph-
ment of GERD.
agus near where it enters the stomach.
X-ray tests can only serve to document an abnormal-
ity, and they are far from perfect. If they are negative,
Causes and symptoms
then other studies are often needed.
To propel food into the stomach (or out of it during
vomiting) the esophagus generates internal pressure just
Resources
like the bowel. Under certain circumstances,that pressure
BOOKS can herniate the esophageal lining through a weakness in
Clouse,Ray E.,and N. E. Diamant. “Motor Physiology and the wall,creating a pouch (a balloon squeezed in the hand
Motor Disorders of the Esophagus.”In Sleisenger & Ford- will herniate through the fingers in the same way). Pouch-
tran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feld-
es are more common in people who have motility disor-
man,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
ders of the esophagus,swallowing that is not well coordi-
nated and may be spastic. A traction diverticulum can
PERIODICALS
develop from a scar that pulls the esophagus out of shape.
Dent,John,and Richard H. Holloway. “Esophageal Motility
and Reflux Testing.”Gastroenterology Clinics of North Food and saliva can collect in all of these pouches.
America25 (Mar. 1996):51-73.
Pouches in the neck usually cause bad breath(hali-
Mittal,Ravinder K.,and David H. Balaban. “The Esopha-
tosis) and the regurgitation of swallowed food and saliva.
gogastric Junction.”New England Journal of Medicine
Some patients with Zenker’s diverticula can push on their
336 (27 Mar. 1997):924-932.
neck and make old food appear in their mouths. Pouches
near the stomach may cause swallowing problems,condi-
David Kaminstein,MD
tions known as achalasiaor dysphagia. Mid-esophageal
pouches usually cause no symptoms.
Esophageal laceration see Mallory-Weiss
syndrome In the most serious cases,a person may be unable to
swallow because the esophagus is obstructed, or the
Esophageal manometry see Esophageal
esphagus may rupture,spilling its contents into the chest
function tests or neck.
1244 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sehcuop
laegahposE
Diagnosis
Difficulty swallowing,bad breath,or food reappear-
ing in the back of the mouth are among the signs physi-
cians look for when diagnosing this condition. Sometimes
the patient may also experience painin the chest resem-
bling a heart attack. A series of x rays taken while swal-
lowing a contrast agent usually demonstrates the divertic-
ulum clearly. An esophagoscopy may also be needed to
gather more detail. Manometry, measuring pressures
inside the esophagus using a balloon that is passed down
it,may help determine the cause of the diverticula.
Treatment
Treatment for this condition is primarily aimed at
alleviating symptoms. Physicians direct the patient to eat
a bland diet,to chew his or her food thoroughly,and to
drink water after eating to clean out the pouches. If the
condition is severe,several types of surgery are available
Prognosis
to remove the pouches and repair the defects. If a pouch
is due to a stenosis (narrowing) in the esophagus it may The two complications that can render these nui-
be possible to relieve it by passing a dilator through it,a sances dangerous,obstruction and rupture,are emergen-
process called bougeinage. cies. Both require immediate medical attention. Other
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1245
Esophageal
pouches
A split x-ray image of the upper chest,neck,and esophagus (left),and chest and esophagus (right).(Custom Medical Stock
Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Achalasia—Failure of the lower end of the esopha-
gus (or another tubular valve) to open, resulting in
obstruction, either partial or complete.
Contrast agent—A substance that produces shad-
ows on an x ray so that hollow structures can be
more easily seen.
Dysphagia—Difficult swallowing.
Esophagoscopy—Looking down the esophagus
with a flexible viewing instrument.
Herniate—To protrude beyond usual limits.
Manometry—Pressure measurement.
than that,diverticula will usually grow slowly over the
years,gradually increasing the symptoms they cause. KEY TERMS
Resources Pathologist—A doctor who specializes in the
anatomic (structural) and chemical changes that
BOOKS
occur with diseases. These doctors function in the
Bennett,J. Claude,and Fred Plum,eds. Cecil Textbook of Med-
laboratory, examining biopsy specimens, and reg-
icine.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed. ulating studies performed by the hospital laborato-
Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange, ries (blood tests, urine tests, etc). Pathologists also
1995. perform autopsies.
Goyal,Raj K. “Diseases of the Esophagus.”In Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et
al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Biopsies (small tissue samples) of inflamed or “sus-
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
picious”areas can be obtained and examined by a pathol-
ogist. Cell scrapings can also be taken by the introduc-
Esophageal ulcers see Ulcers (digestive)
tion of a small brush; this helps in the diagnosis of cancer
or infections.
When treating conditions in the upper gastrointesti-
nal tract,small instruments are passed through the endo-
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy scope that can stretch narrowed areas (strictures), or
remove swallowed objects (such as coins or pins). In
Definition addition,bleeding from ulcers or vessels can be treated
by a number of endoscopic techniques.
An endoscope as used in the field of gastroenterolo-
gy (the medical study of the stomach and intestines) is a Recent studies have shown the usefulness of endo-
thin,flexible tube that uses a lens or miniature camera to scopic removal of early tumors of the esophagus or stom-
view various areas of the gastrointestinal tract. When the ach. This is done either with injection of certain materi-
procedure is limited to the examination of the inside of als (like alcohol), or with the use of instruments (like
the gastrointestinal tract’s upper portion, it is called lasers) that burn the tumor. Other techniques combining
upper endoscopy or esphagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). medications and lasers also show promise.
With the endoscope,the esophagus (swallowing tube),
stomach,and duodenum (first portion of the small intes-
tine) can be easily examined,and abnormalities frequent- Precautions
ly treated. Patients are usually sedated during the exam.
Patients should inquire as to the doctor’s expertise
with these procedures, especially when therapy is the
Purpose main goal. The doctor should be informed of any aller-
gies,medication use,and medical problems.
EGD is performed to evaluate or treat symptoms
relating to the upper gastrointestinal tract,such as:
•upper abdominal or chest pain Description
•nausea or vomiting
First,a “topical”(local) medication to numb the gag
•difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) reflex is given either by spray or is gargled. Patients are
usually sedated for the procedure (though not always) by
•bleeding from the upper intestinal tract
injection of medications into a vein. The endoscopist
•anemia (low blood count). EGD can be used to treat
then has the patient swallow the scope,which is passed
certain conditions, such as an area of narrowing or
through the upper gastrointestinal tract. The lens or cam-
bleeding in the upper gastrointestinal tract
era at the end of the instrument allows the endoscopist to
Upper endoscopy is more accurate than x rays for examine each portion of the upper gastrointestinal tract;
detecting inflammation,ulcers,or tumors. It is used to photos can be taken for reference. Air is pumped in
diagnose early cancer and can frequently determine through the instrument to allow proper observation.
whether a growth is benign (not cancerous) or malignant Biopsies and other procedures can be performed without
(cancerous). any significant discomfort.
1246 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypocsonedoudortsagogahposE
Preparation often due to medications used during the procedure,or
are related to endoscopic therapy. The overall complica-
The upper intestinal tract must be empty for the pro-
tion rate of EGD is less than 2%,and many of these com-
cedure,so it is necessary NOT to eat or drink for at least
plications are minor (such as inflammation of the vein
6–12 hours before the exam. Patients need to inquire
through which medication is given). However, serious
about taking their medications before the procedure.
ones can and do occur,and almost half of them are relat-
ed to the heart or lungs. Bleeding or perforations (holes
Aftercare in the gastrointestinal tract) are also reported,especially
when tumors or narrowed areas are treated or biopsied.
Someone should be available to take the person
Infections have also been rarely transmitted; improved
home after the procedure and stay with them for a while;
cleaning techniques should be able to prevent them.
patients will not be able to drive themselves due to seda-
tion. Pain or any other unusual symptoms should be
reported immediately. Resources
It is important to recognize early signs of any possi- BOOKS
ble complication. The doctor should be notified if the Young,Harvey S.,and Keeffe,Emmet B. “Complications of
patient has fever, trouble swallowing, or increasing Gastrointestinal Endoscopy.”In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s
Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark Feldman,et
throat,chest,or abdominal pain.
al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
Risks PERIODICALS
Chan,Mary F. “Complications of Upper Gastrointestinal
EGD is safe and well tolerated; however,complica- Endoscopy.”Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Clinics of North
tions can occur as with any procedure. These are most America6,no. 2 (Apr. 1996):287-303.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1247
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is performed to evaluate or treat symptoms relating to the upper gastrointestinal tract.
By inserting an endoscope into the mouth and guiding it through the gastrointestinal tract,the esophagus,stomach,and
duodenum can be examined and abnormalities treated.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
OTHER •Auditory evoked potentials are used to diagnose hearing
“Understanding Upper Endoscopy.”American Society for Gas- losses. They can distinguish damage to the acoustic nerve
trointestinal Endoscopy.<http://www.asge.org>. (which carries signals from the ear to the brain stem)
from damage to the auditory pathways within the brain-
David Kaminstein,MD stem. Most auditory EPs record activity from the brain-
stem,and are therefore called “brainstem auditory evoked
Essential tremor see Tremors potentials.” Disorders diagnosed with auditory EPs
include acoustic neuroma(tumors of the inner ear) and
Estradiol see Hormone replacement therapy
multiple sclerosis (chronic disease in which nerves lose
Estrogen see Hormone replacement therapy patches of their outer covering). They may also be used to
assess high frequency hearing ability,to determine brain
Estrogen fractions test see Sex hormones
death,and to monitor brainstem function during surgery
tests
•Somatosensory evoked potentials record transmission of
Estrogen replacement therapy see Hormone
nerve impulses from the limbs to the brain,and can be
replacement therapy used to diagnose nerve damage or degeneration within
the spinal cord or nerve roots from multiple sclerosis,
Ethambutol see Antituberculosis drugs
trauma,or other degenerative disease. Somatosensory
Etodolac see Nonsteroidal anti- EPs can be used to distinguish central versus peripheral
inflammatory drugs nerve disease,when combined with results from a nerve
conduction velocity test,which measures nerve function
in the extremities.
Precautions
Evoked potential studies Evoked potential studies are painless, noninvasive,
and without any significant risk. Somatosensory EP tests
Definition involve very mild electric shocks,usually felt as a tingling.
Evoked potential studies are a group of tests of the
Description
nervous system that measure electrical signals along the
nerve pathways. The person performing the test locates and marks
specific spots on the patient’s head for placement of elec-
trodes. These spots are cleaned,and an adhesive conduct-
Purpose
ing paste is applied. Cup electrodes are attached. For
Nerves convey information to the body by sending somatosensory EP, spots on the arm or leg are also
electrical signals down the length of the nerve. These sig- marked and cleaned; electrodes may be taped in place.
nals can be recorded by wires placed over the nerves on The patient sits or reclines in a chair throughout the tests.
the surface of the skin,in a procedure called an evoked For a visual EP,the patient focuses on a TV screen
potential (EP) study. The person conducting the test which displays a checkerboard pattern. The eye not being
evokes the patient’s neural activity by visual or auditory tested is covered with a patch. For children or others
stimulation or using a mild electrical shock. This causes whose attention may wander, goggles are used which
changes in the electrical potential in the nerves. Analysis show the pattern to one eye at a time. Each eye is usually
of the signals can provide information about the condi- tested twice,and the entire procedure takes approximate-
tion of nerve pathways,especially those in the brain and ly 30–45 minutes.
spinal cord. They can indicate the presence of disease or
For auditory EP, headphones are used to deliver a
degeneration, and can help determine the location of
series of clicks to one ear at a time. A masking or static
nerve lesions.
sound is played into the other ear. Each ear is usually
There are three major types of EP studies used regu- tested twice,and the entire procedure takes approximate-
larly: ly 30–45 minutes.
•Visual evoked potentials are used to diagnose visual For somatosensory EP, mild electrical shocks are
losses due to optic nerve damage,especially from mul- delivered to the arm or leg. This may cause some twitch-
tiple sclerosis. They are also useful to diagnose “hys- ing and tingling. The stimulus lasts for about two min-
terical blindness,”in which loss of vision is not due to utes at a time, and the entire procedure takes approxi-
any nerve damage. mately 30 minutes.
1248 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
seiduts
laitnetop
dekovE
Evoked responses see Evoked potential
KEY TERMS studies
Exanthema subitum see Roseola
Nerve conduction velocity test—A test of the
speed of conduction of nerves, performed on the
nerves in the arm and leg.
Exercise
After the tests,the electrodes are removed with ace-
tone and the scalp is cleaned. Definition
Exercise is physical activity that is planned,struc-
Preparation tured,and repetitive for the purpose of conditioning any
Hair must be clean,dry,and free of any braids,pins, part of the body. Exercise is utilized to improve health,
or jewelry. The patient should shampoo before the test, maintain fitness and is important as a means of physical
and must not use any hair spray,gel,or other hair care rehabilitation.
products after shampooing. Clothing should be loose and
comfortable. The patient may eat and take some medica- Purpose
tions as usual before the test,although sedative medica-
Exercise is useful in preventing or treating coronary
tions should be avoided on the day of the test,if possible.
heart disease,osteoporosis,weakness,diabetes,obesity,
It is best to check with the physician supervising the test
and depression. Range of motion is one aspect of exercise
for specific instructions.
important for increasing or maintaining joint function.
Strengthening exercises provide appropriate resistance to
Aftercare the muscles to increase endurance and strength. Cardiac
rehabilitationexercises are developed and individualized
This test is painless and has no residual effects. The
to improve the cardiovascular system for prevention and
patient may return to work or other activities immediate-
rehabilitation of cardiac disorders and diseases. A well-
ly afterward.
balanced exercise program can improve general health,
build endurance,and delay many of the effects of aging.
Normal results
The benefits of exercise not only improve physical health,
EP test results are displayed as jagged electrical but also enhance emotional well-being.
tracings (wave forms),which have characteristic shapes,
heights,and lengths,indicating the speed and intensity of Precautions
signal transmission. Results are read by someone trained
Before beginning any exercise program,an evalua-
in evoked potential studies.
tion by a physician is recommended to rule out any poten-
tial health risks. Once health and fitness are determined,
Abnormal results
and any or all physical restrictions identified,an individ-
Changes in the electrical tracings may indicate dam- ual’s exercise program should be under the supervision of
age to or degeneration of nerve pathways to the brain a health care professional. This is especially the case
from the eyes, ears, or limbs. Absence of any activity when exercise is used as a form of rehabilitation. If symp-
may mean complete loss of nerve function in that path- toms of dizziness,nausea,excessive shortness of breath,
way. Other changes may provide evidence of the type or chest painare present during any exercise program,an
and location of nerve damage. individual should stop the activity and inform a physician
about these symptoms before resuming activity. Exercise
equipment must be checked to determine if it can bear the
Resources
weight of people of all sizes and shapes.
BOOKS
Misulis,Karl E. Spehlmann’s Evoked Potential Primer.2nd ed.
Boston:Butterworth-Heinemann,1994. Description
Office Practice of Neurology.Samuels,Martin and Steven
Range of motion exercise
Feske,eds. New York:Churchill Livingstone,1996.
Range of motion exercise refers to activity whose
Richard Robinson goal is improving movement of a specific joint. This
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1249
Exercise
motion is influenced by several structures:configuration strength is needed to do daily activities,such as walking,
of bone surfaces within the joint, joint capsule, liga- running and climbing stairs. Strengthening exercises
ments, and muscles and tendons acting on the joint. increase this muscle strength by putting more strain on a
There are three types of range of motion exercises:pas- muscle than it is normally accustomed to receiving. This
sive,active,and active assists. Passive range of motion is increased load stimulates the growth of proteins inside
movement applied to a joint solely by another person or each muscle cell that allow the muscle as a whole to con-
persons or a passive motion machine. When passive tract. There is evidence indicating that strength training
range of motion is applied, the joint of an individual may be better than aerobic exercise alone for improving
receiving exercise is completely relaxed while the out- self-esteem and body image. Weight training allows one
side force moves the body part, such as a leg or arm, immediate feedback,through observation of progress in
throughout the available range. Injury,surgery,or immo- muscle growth and improved muscle tone. Strengthening
bilizationof a joint may affect the normal joint range of exercise can take the form of isometric,isotonic and iso-
motion. Active range of motion is movement of a joint kinetic strengthening.
provided entirely by the individual performing the exer-
cise. In this case,there is no outside force aiding in the ISOMETRIC EXERCISE. During isometric exercises,
muscles contract. However, there is no motion in the
movement. Active assist range of motion is described as
affected joints. The muscle fibers maintain a constant
a joint receiving partial assistance from an outside force.
length throughout the entire contraction. The exercises
This range of motion may result from the majority of
are usually performed against an immovable surface or
motion applied by an exerciser or by the person or per-
object such as pressing one’s hand against a wall. The
sons assisting the individual. It may also be a half-and-
muscles of the arm are contracting but the wall is not
half effort on the joint from each source.
reacting or moving as a result of the physical effort. Iso-
metric training is effective for developing total strength
Strengthening exercise
of a particular muscle or group of muscles. It is often
Strengthening exercise increases muscle strength used for rehabilitation since the exact area of muscle
and mass,bone strength,and the body’s metabolism. It weakness can be isolated and strengthening can be
can help attain and maintain proper weight and improve administered at the proper joint angle. This kind of train-
body image and self-esteem. A certain level of muscle ing can provide a relatively quick and convenient method
1250 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esicrexE
THREE TYPES OF EXERCISE
Stretching, for flexibility Weight-bearing, for Aerobic, for the heart
strengthening muscles
and bone mass
Exercise is utilized to improve health,maintain fitness,and is important as a means of physical rehabilitation.(Illustration by
Electronic Illustrators Group.)
for overloading and strengthening muscles without any
special equipment and with little chance of injury. KEY TERMS
ISOTONIC EXERCISE. Isotonic exercise differs from
Aerobic—Exercise training that is geared to pro-
isometric exercise in that there is movement of a joint
vide a sufficient cardiovascular overload to stimu-
during the muscle contraction. A classic example of an
late increases in cardiac output.
isotonic exercise is weight training with dumbbells and
barbells. As the weight is lifted throughout the range of Calisthenics—Exercise involving free movement
motion,the muscle shortens and lengthens. Calisthenics without the aid of equipment.
are also an example of isotonic exercise. These would
Endurance—The time limit of a person’s ability to
include chin-ups,push-ups,and sit-ups,all of which use
maintain either a specific force or power involving
body weight as the resistance force.
muscular contractions.
ISOKINETIC EXERCISE. Isokinetic exercise utilizes Osteoporosis—A disorder characterized by loss of
machines that control the speed of contraction within the calcium in the bone, leading to thinning of the
range of motion. Isokinetic exercise attempts to combine bones. It occurs frequently in postmenopausal
the best features of both isometrics and weight training. women.
It provides muscular overload at a constant preset speed
while a muscle mobilizes its force through the full range
of motion. For example,an isokinetic stationary bicycle
set at 90 revolutions per minute means that despite how
Aftercare
hard and fast the exerciser works,the isokinetic proper-
ties of the bicycle will allow the exerciser to pedal only Proper cool down after exercise is important in
as fast as 90 revolutions per minute. Machines known as reducing the occurrence of painful muscle spasms. It has
Cybex and Biodex provide isokinetic results; they are been documented that proper cool down may also
generally used by physical therapists and are not readily decrease frequency and intensity of muscle stiffness the
available to the general population. day following any exercise program.
Cardiac rehabilitation Risks
Exercise can be very helpful in prevention and Improper warm up can lead to muscle strains.
rehabilitation of cardiac disorders and disease. With an Overexertion with not enough time between exercise ses-
individually designed exercise program set at a level sions to recuperate can also lead to muscle strains,result-
considered safe for that individual,people with symp- ing in inactivity due to pain. Stress fracturesare also a
toms of heart failure can substantially improve their possibility if activities are strenuous over long periods of
fitness levels. The greatest benefit occurs as muscles time without proper rest. Although exercise is safe for the
improve the efficiency of their oxygen use, which majority of children and adults,there is still a need for
reduces the need for the heart to pump as much blood. further studies to identify potential risks.
While such exercise doesn’t appear to improve the con-
dition of the heart itself, the increased fitness level
Normal results
reduces the total workload of the heart. The related
increase in endurance should also translate into a gener- Significant health benefits are obtained by including a
ally more active lifestyle. Endurance or aerobic rou- moderate amount of physical exercise in the form of an
tines,such as running,brisk walking,cycling,or swim- exercise prescription. This is much like a drug prescription
ming,increase the strength and efficiency of the mus- in that it also helps enhance the health of those who take it
cles of the heart. in the proper dosage. Physical activity plays a positive role
in preventing disease and improving overall health status.
People of all ages,both male and female,benefit from reg-
Preparation
ular physical activity. Regular exercise also provides signif-
A physical examinationby a physician is important icant psychological benefits and improves quality of life.
to determine if strenuous exercise is appropriate or detri-
mental for an individual. Prior to the exercise program,
Abnormal results
proper stretching is important to prevent the possibility
of soft tissue injury resulting from tight muscles, ten- There is a possibility of exercise burnout if an exer-
dons,ligaments,and other joint-related structures. cise program is not varied and adequate rest periods are
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1251
Exercise
not taken between exercise sessions. Muscle,joint,and OTHER
cardiac disorders have been noted among people who American Diabetes Association. <http://www.diabetes.org/
exercise. However, they often have had preexisting or exercise/>.
underlying illnesses. American Heart Association. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine. <http://
www.sportsmed.org/>.
American Society of Exercise Physiologists. <http://www.css.
Resources
edu/asep/>.
BOOKS
Bookhout,Mark R.,and Grenman,Philip. Principles of Exer- L. Fleming Fallon,Jr.,MD,DrPH
cise Prescription.Woburn,MA:Butterworth-Heinemann,
2001. Exercise electrocardiogram see Stress test
Harr,Eric. The Portable Personal Trainer.New York:Broad-
way Books,2001. Exercise stress test see Stress test
McArdle,William D.,Frank I. Katch,and Victor L. Katch.
Exhibitionism see Sexual perversions
Exercise Physiology:Energy,Nutrition,and Human Per-
formance,5th ed.Philadelphia:Lippincott,2001. Exocrine pancreatic cancer see Pancreatic
Redding,Morgan. Physical Fitness :Concepts and Applica-
cancer, exocrine
tions.Dubuque,IA:Kendall/Hunt Publishing,2001.
Roberts,Matt. 90-Day Fitness Plan.Littleton,CO:DK Pub-
lishers,2001.
PERIODICALS
Brun,J. F.,M. Dumortier,C. Fedou,and J. Mercier. “Exercise Exophthalmos
Hypoglycemia in Nondiabetic Subjects.”Diabetes and
Metabolism27 (2001):92-106. Definition
Evans,E. M.,R. E. Van Pelt,E. F. Binder,D. B. Williams,A.
When there is an increase in the volume of the tissue
A. Ehsani,and W. M. Kohrt. “Effects of HRT and Exer-
behind the eyes,the eyes will appear to bulge out of the
cise Training on Insulin Action,Glucose Tolerance,and
Body Composition in Older Women.”Journal of Applied face. The terms exophthalmos and proptosis apply. Prop-
Physiology90 (2001):2033-2040. tosis can refer to any organ that is displaced forward,
Killian,K. J. “Is Exercise Tolerance Limited by the Hart or the while exophthalmos refers just to the eyes.
Lungs?”Clinical Investigations in Medicine24 (2001):
110-117.
Description
Resnick,B. “Testing a model of exercise behavior in older
adults”.Research in Nursing and Health,24 no. 2:83-92. The eye socket (orbit) is made of bone and therefore
(2001).
will not yield to increased pressure within it. Only for-
ward displacement of the eyeball (globe) will allow more
ORGANIZATIONS room if tissue behind the eye is increasing.
American Alliance for Health,Physical Education,Recreation
& Dance. 1900 Association Dr.,Reston,VA 20191-1598.
Causes and symptoms
(800) 213-7193. Fax:(703) 476-9527. <aahperd@aahperd.
org>. <http://www.aahperd.org>.
The most common cause of exophthalmos is
American College of Sports Medicine. 401 W. Michigan
Graves’disease, overactivity of the thyroid gland. The
Street,Indianapolis,IN 46202-3233. (317) 637-9200.
contents of the orbits swell due to inflammation,forcing
Fax:(317) 634-7817. <mkeckhaver@acsm.org>. <http://
the eyes forward. The inflammation affects primarily the
www.acsm.org/>.
muscles. This combination of muscle impairment and
American Council on Exercise. 5820 Oberlin Drive,Suite 102,
San Diego,CA 92121-3787. (800) 825-3636. Fax:(858) forward displacement reduces eye movement, causing
535-1778. <http://www.acefitness. org/>. double vision and crossed eyes (strabismus). The optic
American Medical Association. 515 N. State Street,Chicago, nerves can also be affected, reducing vision, and the
IL 60610. (312) 464-5000. <http://www.ama-assn.org/>. clear membrane (conjunctiva) covering the white part of
American Physical Therapy Association. 1111 North Fairfax the eyes and lining the inside of the eyelids can swell.
Street Alexandria,VA 22314. (703) 684-2782. <http:// Finally,the eyes may protrude so far that the eyelids can-
www.apta.org>.
not close over them,leading to corneal damage.
National Athletic Trainers’Association. 2952 Stemmons Free-
way,Dallas,TX 75247-6916. (800) 879-6282. Fax:(214) Exophthalmos from Graves’ disease is bilateral
637-2206. <http://www.nata.org/>. (occurring on both sides),but not necessarily symmetri-
1252 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
somlahthpoxE
cal. In contrast,exophthalmos from orbital tumors or a
blood clot in the brain happens on only one side.
Diagnosis Resources
Exophthalmos is obvious when it is advanced BOOKS
enough to cause complications. When there is doubt in Newell,Frank W. “Endocrine Disease and the Eye.”In Oph-
thalmology:Principles and Concepts.8th ed. St. Louis:
the early stages, a mechanical device called an exoph-
Mosby,1996.
thalmometer can measure the protrusion. Computed
Newell,Frank W. “The Orbit.”In Ophthalmology:Principles
tomography scans (CT scans) are of great value in
and Concepts.8th ed. St. Louis:Mosby,1996.
examining the bony components of the orbit. Magnetic
Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed.
resonance imaging(MRI) scanning is equally valuable
Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1995.
for displaying the contents of the orbit,because it “sees Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
through”the bone. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
Treatment
If a tumor is growing behind the eye,it needs to be
removed. If Graves’disease is the cause,it may subside
with treatment of the overactive thyroid,but this is not
guaranteed. Local care to the front of the eye to keep it Expectorants
moist is necessary if the eyelid cannot close.
Definition
Expectorants are drugs that loosen and clear mucus
Prognosis
and phlegm from the respiratory tract.
Exophthalmos can be progressive. Its progress must
be carefully followed, treating complications as they
Purpose
occur.
The drug described here,guaifenesin,is a common
ingredient in cough medicines. It is classified as an
Prevention
expectorant,a medicine that helps clear mucus and other
Vision can usually be preserved with attentive treat- secretions from the respiratory tract. However, some
ment. There is currently no way to prevent any of the debate exists about how effectively guaifenesin does this.
underlying conditions that lead to exophthalmos. In addition,some cough medicines contain other ingredi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1253
Expectorants
KEY TERMS
Conjunctivae—The clear membranes that line the
inside of the eyelids and cover the white part (scle-
ra) of the eyeballs.
Cornea—The clear, dome-shaped part of the front of
the eye, through which light first enters the eye. It is
located in front of the colored part of the eye (iris).
Inflammation—The body’s reaction to invasion by
foreign matter, particularly infection. The result is
swelling and redness from an increase in water
and blood, and pain from the chemical activity of
A side view of the bulging eye (exophthalmos) of a person the reaction.
suffering from thytoxicosis.Exophthalmos is caused by
swelling of the soft tissue in the eye socket,which forces Strabismus—Any deviation of the eyes from a com-
the eyeball to be pushed forward and the eyelids stretched mon direction. Commonly called a turned eye.
apart.(Photograph by Dr.P.Marazzi, Photo Researchers, Inc.
Thyroid—A gland in the neck overlying the wind-
Reproduced by permission.)
pipe that regulates the speed of metabolic process-
es by producing a hormone, thyroxin.
Children 2–5
KEY TERMS
50–100 mg every four hours. No more than 600 mg
in 24 hours.
Asthma—A disease in which the air passages of
the lungs become inflamed and narrowed.
Children under two
Bronchitis—Inflammation of the air passages of
the lungs. Not recommended.
Chronic—A word used to describe a long-lasting
condition. Chronic conditions often develop grad-
Precautions
ually and involve slow changes.
Cough suppressant—Medicine that stops or pre- Do not take more than the recommended daily
vents coughing. dosage of guaifenesin.
Emphysema—An irreversible lung disease in Guaifenesin is not meant to be used for coughs asso-
which breathing becomes increasingly difficult. ciated with asthma,emphysema,chronic bronchitis,or
smoking. It also should not be used for coughs that are
Mucus—Thick fluid produced by the moist mem-
producing a large amount of mucus.
branes that line many body cavities and structures.
A lingering cough could be a sign of a serious med-
Phlegm—Thick mucus produced in the air passages.
ical condition. Coughs that last more than seven days or
Respiratory tract—The air passages from the nose
are associated with fever, rash, sore throat, or lasting
into the lungs.
headacheshould have medical attention. Call a physi-
Secretion—A substance, such as saliva or mucus, cian as soon as possible.
that is produced and given off by a cell or a gland.
Some studies suggest that guaifenesin causes birth
defects. Women who are pregnant or plan to become
pregnant should check with their physicians before using
any products that contain guaifenesin. Whether guaifen-
ents that may cancel out guaifenesin’s effects. Cough
esin passes into breast milk is not known, but no ill
suppressantssuch as codeine,for example,work against
effects have been reported in nursing babies whose moth-
guaifenesin because they discourage coughing up the
ers used guaifenesin.
secretions that the expectorant loosens.
There are other ways to loosen and clear the respirato-
ry secretions associated with colds. These include using a Side effects
humidifier and drinking six to eight glasses of water a day.
Side effects are rare, but may include vomiting,
diarrhea,stomach upset,headache,skin rash,and hives.
Description
Guaifenesin is an ingredient in many cough medi-
cines, such as Anti-Tuss, Dristan Cold & Cough, Interactions
Guaifed, GuaiCough, and some Robitussin products.
Guaifenesin is not known to interact with any foods
Some products that contain guaifenesin are available
or other drugs. However,cough medicines that contain
only with a physician’s prescription; others can be
guaifenesin may contain other ingredients that do inter-
bought without a prescription. They come in several
act with foods or drugs. Check with a physician or phar-
forms,including capsules,tablets,and liquids.
macist for details about specific products.
Recommended dosage
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
Adults and children 12 and over
200–400 mg every four hours. No more than 2,400 Exstrophy of the urinary bladder see
mg in 24 hours. Congenital bladder anomalies
External fetal monitoring see Electronic
Children 6–11
fetal monitoring
100–200 mg every four hours. No more than 1,200
mg in 24 hours. External otitis see Otitis externa
1254 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stnarotcepxE
External sphincter KEY TERMS
electromyography
Anti-cholinergic drug—A medication that blocks
Definition
or subdues the action of the neurotransmitter
External sphincter electromyographyhelps physi- acetylcholine.
cians determine how well the external urinary sphincter Cholinergic drug—A medication that mimics or
muscle is working by measuring the electrical activity in enhances the action of the neurotransmitter
it during contraction and relaxation. acetylcholine.
Sphincter—A circular muscle that aids in the
Purpose opening or closing of an opening in the body.
The external sphincter muscle is the ring-like muscle
that controls urine release from the bladder. When a
patient cannot voluntarily control urination (inconti-
patients, the needles are inserted around the urethra.
nence),a physician may order this test to determine if the
The discomfort of placing the needles is about the same
problem is caused by the failure of this muscle. The vol-
as that of an injection. The needles are withdrawn,and
untary contraction or release of a muscle such as the
the wires are taped to the thigh.
external sphincter involves a complex process in which
the nerves controlling the muscle signal it to move •Anal plug electrodes. The tip of an anal plug is lubricat-
through the release and uptake of chemicals called neu- ed and inserted into the rectum as the patient relaxes the
rotransmitters and the generation of electrical impulses. anal sphincter. Electrodes are attached to the anal plug.
This test records the electrical impulses given off when
Once the electrodes are in place and attached to the
the muscle contracts or relaxes and allows the physician
recording device,the patient is asked to alternately con-
to determine if the muscle is working properly,if it has
tract and relax the external sphincter muscle. The electri-
been damaged by disease,or some other condition.
cal activity generated during these contractions and relax-
ations is recorded on a graph called an electromyogram.
Precautions
Patients who are taking muscle relaxants or drugs Preparation
that act like or have an effect on the neurotransmitter
Before the test,the patient should discuss with the
acetylcholine (cholinergic or anti-cholinergic drugs)
doctor whether it is necessary to temporarily discontinue
should tell the doctor since they will change the test
any medications, and follow the doctor’s orders. No
results. The results will also be altered if the patient moves
changes in diet or activity are necessary.
during the test or if the electrodes are improperly placed.
Aftercare
Description
Women may see some blood in their urine the first time
The patient puts on a surgical gown and lies down on
they urinate after the test. Blood in the urine of men or blood
the examining table. The procedure,which takes between
in the urine of women after the first urination should be
30–60 minutes,may be conducted one of three ways:
reported the doctor. The patient should take a warm bath and
•Skin electrodes. This is the most commonly used method drink plenty of fluids to ease any discomfort after the test.
of recording information. The skin where the electrodes
will be placed is cleaned and shaved and an electrically
Risks
conductive paste is applied. The electrodes are then taped
Complications of external sphincter electromyogra-
in place. For female patients, the electrodes are taped
phy are rare. Occasionally patients report blood in their
around the urethra, while for male patients they are
urine after being tested with needle electrodes. Also,the
placed between the scrotum and the anus.
urethra may become mildly irritated causing a change in
•Needle electrodes. This is considered the most accurate
the normal frequency of urination.
method,since the electrodes are inserted directly into
the muscle,using needles to guide placement. For male
Normal results
patients,a gloved finger is inserted in the rectum,then
needles with wires attached are inserted through the In a normally functioning external sphincter muscle,
skin between the anus and the scrotum. For female the electromyogram will show increased electrical activi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1255
External
sphincter
electromyography
ty when the patient tightens the muscle and a little or no •congenital diaphragmatic hernia(the profusion of part
electrical activity when it is relaxed. of the stomach through an opening in the diaphragm).
•pneumonia
Abnormal results
•blood poisoning
A diseased external sphincter muscle will produce ECMO is also used to support a child or adult
an abnormal pattern of electrical activity. Conditions that patient’s damaged, infected, or failing lungs for a few
affect the external sphincter may include multiple scle- hours to allow treatment or healing. It is effective for
rosis,neurogenic bladder,Parkinson’s disease,spinal those patients with severe,but reversible,heart or lung
cord injury, and stress incontinence. However, addi- problems who haven’t responded to treatment with a
tional tests must be done in order to confirm any of these ventilator, drugs, or extra oxygen. Adults and children
diagnoses. who need ECMO usually have one of these problems:
•heart failure
Resources
•pneumonia
BOOKS
•respiratory failurecaused by trauma or severe infec-
“External Sphincter Electromyography.”In Illustrated Guide to
tion
Diagnostic Tests,ed. J. A. Lewis. Springhouse,PA:
Springhouse Corp. 1994. The ECMO procedure can help a patient’s lungs and
heart rest and recover,but it will not cure the underlying
Tish Davidson disease. Any patient who requires ECMO is seriously ill
and will likely die without the treatment. Because there
is some risk involved, this method is used only when
other means of support have failed.
Extracorporeal membrane Precautions
oxygenation
Typically, ECMO patients have daily chest x rays
and blood work,and constant vital sign monitoring. They
Definition
are usually placed on a special rotating bed that is
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is a designed to decrease pressure on the skin and help move
special procedure that uses an artificial heart-lung secretions from the lungs.
machine to take over the work of the lungs (and some-
After the patient is stable on ECMO,the breathing
times also the heart). ECMO is used most often in new-
machine settings will be lowered to “rest”settings,which
borns and young children,but it also can be used as a last
allows the lungs to rest without the risk of too much oxy-
resort for adults whose heart or lungs are failing.
gen or pressure from the ventilator.
Purpose
Description
In newborns,ECMO is used to support or replace an
There are two types of ECMO:Venoarterial (V-A)
infant’s undeveloped or failing lungs by providing oxy-
ECMO supports the heart and lungs, and is used for
gen and removing carbon dioxide waste products so the
patients with blood pressure or heart functioning prob-
lungs can rest. Infants who need ECMO may include
lems in addition to respiratory problems. Venovenous (V-
those with:
V) ECMO supports the lungs only.
•meconium aspiration syndrome (breathing in of a new-
V-A ECMO requires the insertion of two tubes,one
born’s first stool by a fetus or newborn, which can
in the jugular and one in the carotid artery. In the V-V
block air passages and interfere with lung expansion)
ECMO procedure,the surgeon places a plastic tube into
•persistent pulmonary hypertension (a disorder in the jugular vein through a small incision in the neck.
which the blood pressure in the arteries supplying the
Once in place,the tubes are connected to the ECMO
lungs is abnormally high)
circuit,and then the machine is turned on. The patient’s
•respiratory distress syndrome (a lung disorder usually blood flows out through the tube and may look very dark
of premature infants that causes increasing difficulty in because it contains very little oxygen. A pump pushes the
breathing, leading to a life-threatening deficiency of blood through an artificial membrane lung,where oxygen
oxygen in the blood) is added and carbon dioxide is removed. The size of the
1256 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitanegyxo
enarbmem
laeroprocartxE
artificial lung depends on the size of the patient; sometimes
adults need two lungs. The blood is then warmed and KEY TERMS
returned to the patient. A steady amount of blood (called
the flow rate) is pushed through the ECMO machine every Carotid artery—Two main arteries (passageway
minute. As the patient improves,the flow rate is lowered. carrying blood from the heart to other parts of the
Many patients require heavy sedationwhile they are body) that carry blood to the brain.
on ECMO to lessen the amount of oxygen needed by the Congenital diaphragmatic hernia—The profusion
muscles. of part of the stomach through an opening in the
As the patient improves,the amount of ECMO sup- diaphragm.
port will be decreased gradually, until the machine is Meconium aspiration syndrome—Breathing in of
turned off for a brief trial period. If the patient does well meconium (a newborn’s first stool) by a fetus or
without ECMO,the treatment is stopped. newborn, which can block air passages and inter-
Typically,newborns remain on ECMO for three to fere with lung expansion.
seven days,although some babies need more time (espe- Membrane oxygenator—The artificial lung that
cially if they have a diaphragmatic hernia). Once the adds oxygen and removes carbon dioxide.
baby is off ECMO,he or she will still need a ventilator
Pulmonary hypertension—A disorder in which the
(breathing machine) for a few days or weeks. Adults may
blood pressure in the arteries supplying the lungs
remain on ECMO for days to weeks,depending on the
is abnormally high.
condition of the patient,but treatment may be continued
for a longer time depending on the type of heart or lung Respiratory distress syndrome—A lung disorder
disease, the amount of damage to the lungs before usually of premature infants that causes increasing
ECMO was begun,and the presence of any other illness- difficulty in breathing, leading to a life-threatening
es or health problems. deficiency of oxygen in the blood.
Venoarterial (V-A) bypass—The type of ECMO
that provides both heart and lung support, using
Preparation
two tubes (one in the jugular vein and one in the
Before ECMO is begun,the patient receives medica-
carotid artery).
tion to ease painand restrict movement.
Venovenous (V-V) bypass—The type of ECMO that
provides lung support only, using a tube inserted
Aftercare
into the jugular vein.
Because infants on ECMO may have been strug-
gling with low oxygen levels before treatment,they may
be at higher risk for developmental problems. They will
need to be monitored as they grow. There is a small chance that some part of the com-
plex equipment may fail,which could introduce air into
the system or affect the patient’s blood levels, causing
Risks
damage or death of vital organs (including the brain).
Bleeding is the biggest risk for ECMO patients,
For this reason, the ECMO circuit is constantly moni-
since blood thinners are given to guard against blood
tored by a trained technologist.
clots. Bleeding can occur anywhere in the body, but is
most serious when it occurs in the brain. This is why
Normal results
doctors periodically perform ultrasound brain scans of
anyone on ECMO. Stroke, which may be caused by Lungs and/or heart return to healthy functioning.
bleeding or blood clots in the brain,has occurred in some
patients undergoing ECMO. Abnormal results
If bleeding becomes a problem, the patient may Lungs and/or heart do not improve while on ECMO.
require frequent blood transfusions or operations to con-
trol the bleeding. If the bleeding can’t be stopped,
Resources
ECMO will be withdrawn.
PERIODICALS
Other risks include infection or vocal cord injury.
American Academy of Pediatrics. “Recommendations on
Some patients develop severe blood infections that cause Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation.”Pediatrics85
irreversible damage to vital organs. (Apr. 1990):618-619.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1257
Extracorporeal
membrane
oxygenation
Anderson III,Harry,and Cynthia Steimie,et al. “Extracorpore- deeply lodged irritant (foreign body),or the effects of a
al Life Support for Adult Cardiorespiratory Failure.” previously unrecognized injury. When presented with
Surgery114 (1993):161. general symptoms,ultrasound can speed diagnosis if a
Shanley,Charles J.,Ronald B. Hirschi,et.al. “Extracorporeal serious condition is suspected.
Life Support for Neonatal Respiratory Failure:A 20-year
Experience.”Annals of Surgery220 (1994):269. •Impaired vision. Fuzzy vision, poor night vision,
UK Collaborative ECMO Trial Group. “Extracorporeal Mem- restricted (tunnel) vision, blind spots, extreme light
brane Oxygenation Improved Survival in Mature New- sensitivity,and even blindness can all stem from inner
born Infants with Severe Respiratory Failure.”Lancet348 eye conditions ranging from glaucomaand cataracts,
(13 July 1996):75-82. to retinitis,detached retina,tumors,or impaired blood
circulation. Again, high resolution ultrasound can
ORGANIZATIONS
American Society of Extra-Corporeal Technology. 11480 Sun- quickly identify causes and pinpoint their location. A
set Hills Rd.,Ste. 210E,Reston,VA 20190. (703) 435- special type of ultrasound,known as Doppler,can even
8556. <http://www.amsect.org>. perceive and measure circulation in the tiny blood ves-
ECMO Moms and Dads. PO Box 53848,Lubbock,TX 79543. sels of the eye.
(806) 794-0259.
•Eye trauma. The eye can be damaged by a direct impact
Extracorporeal Life Support Organization. 1327 Jones Dr.,Ste.
or a puncture wound,as a result of a general head trau-
101,Ann Arbor,MI 48105. (734) 998-6600. <http://www.
ma,or by intense light exposure. Even when the cause
elso.med.umich.edu>.
of injury is obvious, ultrasound can reveal the exact
Carol A. Turkington type, extent, and location of damage, from deforma-
tions and ruptures to internal bleeding, and help to
Extracorporeal shock-wave see Lithotripsy guide emergency care efforts.
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis see •Lens replacement surgery. Exact measurement of the
eye’s optical dimensions with ultrasound greatly
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
improves the visual outcome for cataract patients
Eye and orbit sonograms see Eye and orbit receiving permanent synthetic lenses; and for severely
ultrasounds myopic patients receiving implanted corrective lenses.
Ophthalmic ultrasound imaging is also used routine-
ly to guide the precise placement of instruments during
surgery, and can be used directly for the treatment of
glaucoma and tumors of the eye.
Eye and orbit ultrasounds
Precautions
Definition
Ultrasound of the eye,properly performed by quali-
Ultrasound imaging equipment allows eye special-
fied personnel using appropriate equipment,has no risks.
ists (ophthalmologists) to “see”the eye in great detail
There is no evidence to suggest that the procedure itself
without the painand risk of exploratory surgery,or the
poses any threat to a healthy eye,or worsens the condi-
limitations and uncertainty inherent to traditional visu-
tion of a diseased or injured eye.
al examination. Ultrasound is used to detect and diag-
nose many eye diseases and injuries, to measure the
eye prior to corrective surgery,and directly as a treat-
Description
ment tool.
Ophthalmic ultrasound equipment sends high fre-
quency pulses of sound into the eye,where they bounce
Purpose
off the boundaries between different structures in the eye
An ophthalmologist uses ultrasonic imaging to help and produce a distinctive pattern of echoes. This echo
diagnose the underlying cause(s) of a patient’s symp- pattern is received and interpreted by a computer to pro-
toms,to assess the general condition of an injured eye, duce an image on a television screen. The time it takes an
and to measure the eye prior to corrective surgery. Situa- echo to return to the receiver corresponds to the depth it
tions that may call for ultrasonic imaging include: traveled into the eye.
•Excessive tearing or visible infection. These external Single transducer (the sound transmitter/receiver)
symptoms could indicate a serious underlying problem ultrasound is used to measure distances within the eye.
such as a tumor,an internal infection,the presence of a This is A-mode ultrasound. A linear array of transduc-
1258 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sdnuosartlu
tibro
dna
eyE
ers in a single small probe,B-mode,provides a picture
of a cross section through the eye. Doppler mode KEY TERMS
ultrasound combines B-mode with the ability to detect
and measure the flow of blood in the tiny vessels of Cataracts—A clouding of the lens of the eye or the
the eye. material immediately surrounding it, causing
As a direct treatment tool, the vibrations of high blurred vision. For many people it occurs naturally
intensity A-mode ultrasound can be used to heat and with aging, but may also result from injury.
erode tumors. The same technique can be used to con- Glaucoma—A common eye disease characterized
trol glaucoma by selectively destroying the cells which by increased fluid pressure in the eye that dam-
produce the fluid that causes the internal pressure of the ages the optic nerve, which carries sensations to
eye to rise. the brain. Glaucoma can be caused by another
The procedure followed in a regular ultrasonic eye eye disorder, such as a tumor or congenital mal-
examinationis relatively simple. The patient relaxes in formation, or appear without obvious cause, but if
a comfortable chair in a darkened room. Mild anesthetic untreated it generally leads to blindness.
eye drops are administered and the head is held secure. Intraocular—Literally, within the eye.
The ultrasonic probe,coated with a sterile gel to ensure
Ophthalmologist—A medical doctor specializing
good contact, is lightly pressed against the eye as the
in eye care who is generally, but not necessarily,
images are made. The probe may be applied to the eye-
an eye surgeon.
lid or directly to the eye,as necessary. The patient feels
nothing else,and the whole office procedure takes about Retina—The third and innermost membrane of the
15 minutes. eye, which contains the light-sensitive nerve tissue
that leads into the optic nerve and is the primary
instument of vision. Inflammation of the retina
Preparation (retinitis) has many causes, including over-expo-
sure to intense light, diabetes, and syphilis.
Preparation by the patient is generally unnecessary,
although under special circumstances an ophthalmologist
may perform pretest procedures. The ophthalmologist
and/or ultrasound technician will conduct all prepara-
tions at the time of the test. Abnormal results
Because diagnostic ultrasound is generally used to
Aftercare investigate symptoms,the results of a scan will often be
abnormal and they will detect evidence of an underlying
Patients may experience partial and temporary
condition.
blurred vision,as well as “eye strain”headaches. These
symptoms usually fade within an hour of the procedure,
Resources
during which time patients should rest their eyes and
avoid all activities that require good eyesight,like driving. BOOKS
Guthoff,Rudolf. Ultrsound in Ophthalmologic Diagnosis:A
Practical Guide.New York:Thieme Medical Publishers,
Risks
1991.
Shtasel,Philip. Medical Tests and Diagnostic Procedures:A
Improperly focused,high-intensity ultrasound could
Patient’s Guide to Just What the Doctor Ordered.New
burn and physically disrupt delicate eye tissue and cause
York:Harper & Row,1991.
injury. This risk is,however,slight and would arise only
The Patient’s Guide to Medical Tests.Ed. Barry L. Zaret,et al.
from improper use,or as a potential side effect of tumor
Boston:Houghton Mifflin,1997.
or glaucoma treatment.
PERIODICALS
Moyer,Paula. “High-frequency Doppler Boosts Small Vessel
Normal results Imaging.”Ophthalmology Times(15 Oct. 1996):50.
Murray,Maxine. “Basics of Ultrasonography.”Student British
A normal ultrasound scan would indicate a fully
Medical Journal(Aug. 1996):269-272.
healthy eye. For therapeutic ultrasound,a normal result
Nash,Karen. “High Tech A/B-scans:How High?”Ophthalmol-
would be an improvement in the targeted condition,such
ogy Times(Apr. 1995):19.
as shrinking of a tumor or lessening of pressure inside Sabbagh,Leslie. “The Growing Effect of Ultrasound.”Oph-
the eye of a glaucoma patient. thalmology Times(Jan. 1995):16.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1259
Eye
and
orbit
ultrasounds
ORGANIZATIONS Intraocular cancer of the iris usually grows slowly
American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,PO and usually doesn’t spread. The tumor is seen on the iris
Box 7424,San Francisco,CA 94120-7424. <http://www. as a darker spot than the surrounding area. Intraocular
eyenet.org>. cancer of the choroid or ciliary body occurs in the back
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine. 14750 Sweitzer of the eye. They are classified by size with a small tumor
Lane,Suite 100,Laurel,MD 20707-5906. (800) 638-
being 2-3 mm or smaller and a medium or large tumor
5352. <http://www.aium.org>.
being bigger than 3 mm.
National Eye Institute. 2020 Vision Place,Bethesda,MD
20892-3655. (301) 496-5248. <http://www.nei.nih.gov>. Intraocular cancer can spread and become extraocu-
lar as well. If not found and treated early enough it can
Kurt Richard Sternlof spread to the surrounding tissues,the optic nerve or into
the eye socket.
Causes and symptoms
Eye cancer Genetics is thought to play a role in eye cancer. In
regards to retinoblastoma,it is believed that if a tumor
Definition
develops only in one eye then it isn’t hereditary. Howev-
A cancerous growth in any part of the eye. er, if a tumor occurs in both eyes then it is hereditary.
Those who have hereditary retinoblastoma have a rare
risk of developing a tumor in the brain and should be
Description
monitored on a regular basis.
Eye cancer can occur in many parts of the eye
The cause of intraocular melanoma is still vague.
where a tumor can occur. Because of this there are sever-
Genetics could play a role,but age is also a factor. Inter-
al types of ocular cancer. Their occurrence varies in the
estingly enough,this type of cancer is seen most often in
age of the affected individual. This article will focus on
white people from a northern European descent.
retinoblastoma, the most common eye cancer in chil-
dren,and intraocular melanoma,the most common eye The symptoms of this type of cancer usually begin
cancer in adults. with blurred vision and tenderness of the eye. Advanced
symptoms may include loss of vision. If these symptoms
Retinoblastoma can occur at any age but is most
persist a person should make an appointment with their
often seen in children younger than five. About 200 chil-
ophthalmologist.
dren a year are diagnosed with it in the United States.
Retinoblastoma starts with a small tumor in the retina,
Diagnosis
the very back of the eye. In growing children,the retina
originates from cells called retinoblasts that grow and An ophthalmologist makes a diagnosis. The doctor
divide very quickly. These cells eventually become the is usually able to see the tumor through the pupil or
mature cells of the retina when they stop growing. In the directly on the iris if the cancer is intraocular melanoma
case of retinoblastoma the retinoblasts don’t stop grow- of the iris. Because the doctor can usually readily see the
ing and form a tumor that can continue to grow and cause tumor a biopsy is rarely needed.
further complications if not treated quickly. An ultrasound or a fluorescein angiographyare two
tests doctors use to further diagnose eye cancers. In an
Retinoblastoma typically has three classifications:
ultrasound sound waves are pointed at the tumor and
intraocular,extraocular and recurrent retinoblastoma. In
depending on how they reflect off the tumor the doctor
the intraocular form the cancer can be found in one or
can better diagnose it. In a fluorescein angiography a flu-
both eyes but not in tissue external of the eye. In the
orescent dye is injected into the patients arm. When this
extraocular form the cancer has spread outside the eye. It
dye circulates through the body and reaches the eye a
can spread to the tissue surrounding the eye or it can
series of rapid pictures are taken through the pupil. The
invade other areas of the body. In the recurrent form the
tumor will show up in these photos.
cancer returns after already being treated. It may recur in
the eye,its surrounding tissues,or elsewhere in the body. Once a diagnosis has been made,the treatment can
begin.
Intraocular melanoma is a rare cancer overall,yet it
is the most common eye cancer seen in adults. It is when
Treatment
cancer cells are found in the uvea of the eye. The uvea
includes the iris (the colored portion of eye),the ciliary The treatment depends on how far advanced the
body (an eye muscle that focuses the lens) and the tumor is. If the tumor is in the advanced stages and there
choroid (found in the back of the eye next to the retina). is little hope of regaining vision the most effective treat-
1260 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
recnac
eyE
ment is an enucleation,the removal of the eye. This obvi-
ously is a drastic treatment and is avoided if possible. KEY TERMS
Other eye surgeries include the following:
•choroidectomy-removal of part of the choroid, Carcinogen—A substance that is known to cause
cancer.
•iridectomy-removal of part of the iris,
Cornea—The clear layer that covers the front part
•iridocyclectomy-removal of parts of the ciliary body
of the eye.
and parts of iris,
Enucleation—Surgical removal of the eye.
•iridotrabeculectomy-removal of parts of the supporting
Pupil—The hole in the eye that allows light in.
tissues around the cornea and iris.
In eye cancer where the tumor is small and there is a
good chance that the vision will be restored less drastic
measures than the above surgeries are taken. Radiation
Resources
and chemotherapy are two courses of treatment that
help in killing off the existing tumor and preventing its PERIODICALS
spread into other areas of the body. Wilson,Czechonska,Finger,Rausen,Hooper,and Haik.
“Chemotherapy for Eye Cancer.”Survey of Ophthalmolo-
Besides radiation and chemotherapy there are other
gy(March/April 2001):416-44.
methods of treating eye cancer. Cryotherapy uses
extreme cold to destroy the cancer cells. Thermotherapy OTHER
The American Cancer Society. 2000. <http://www.cancer.
uses heat to destroy the cancer cells. Photocoagulation
org>.
uses a laser to destroy blood vessels that supply the tumor
Cancer Net. 2001. <http://www.cancernet.nci.nih.gov>.
with nutrients. If the tumor isn’t advanced these are good
JHMI. 2001. <http://www.med.jhu.edu>.
options to treat it in order to avoid losing an eye.
National Eye Institute. 1998. <http://www.nei.nih.gov>.
A radiation/surgical treatment for eye cancer is
brachytherapy. A small plaque with radioactive iodine on Thomas Scott Eagan
one side and gold on the other is stitched to the eye Ronald Watson,PhD
behind the tumor with the radioactive iodine facing the
tumor. The gold is used to shield the other tissues from
the radiation. It is left there for a period of time depend-
ing on the dosage of radiation needed and then it is
removed. In this way the tumor is treated and hopefully Eye examination
will shrink and eventually die.
Definition
An eye examination is a series of tests that measure
Alternative Treatment
a person’s ocular health and visual status, to detect
Other than the treatments above, there aren’t any abnormalities in the components of the visual system,
alternative treatments. New clinical trials are constantly and to determine how well the person can see.
under way to further the treatment of the disease in the
future.
Purpose
An eye examination is performed by an ophthalmol-
Prognosis
ogist M.D. or D.O. (doctor of osteopathy),or an optom-
All forms of retinoblastoma and intraocular mela- etrist (O.D.) to determine if there are any pre-existing or
noma are treatable. Enucleation can usually be avoided if potential vision problems. Eye exams may also reveal the
found early enough. The outlook is positive for people presence of many non-eye diseases. Many systemic dis-
with eye cancer. eases can affect the eyes,and since the blood vessels on
the retina are observed during the exam,certain problems
may be uncovered (e.g.,high blood pressure or diabetes).
Prevention
Infants should be examined by a physician to detect
A good healthy diet and lifestyle are always recom- any physical abnormalities. Frequency of eye exams then
mended to prevent cancer. Known carcinogens should generally differs with age and the health of the person. Eye
always be avoided. exams can be performed in infants, and if a problem is
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1261
Eye
examination
noted the infant can be seen,generally by a pediatric oph- ders,all medications being taken (e.g.,OTC medications,
thalmologist. A child with no symptoms should have an antibiotics,and birth control pills),any blood relatives
eye exam at age three. Early exams are important because with eye disorders,and any systemic disorders the patient
permanent decreases in vision (e.g., amblyopia, also may have. The patient should also tell the doctor about
called lazy eye) can occur if not treated early (usually by hobbies and work conditions. This information helps in
ages 6–9). Again, with no other symptoms, the second modifying prescriptions and lets the doctor know how the
exam should take place before first grade. After first patient uses his or her eyes. For example,using a comput-
grade, the American Optometric Association recom- er screen vs. construction work,the working distance of a
mends an eye exam every two years; ages 19–40,every computer screen may affect the prescription; the con-
two to three years; ages 41–60, every two years; and struction worker needs protective eyewear.
annually after that. However,these are recommendations
The patient should bring their current pair of glasses
for healthy people with no risk factors. Patients should
to the exam. The doctor can get the prescription from the
ask their doctors how often they should come for exams.
glasses by using an instrument called a lensometer.
Some patients have risk factors for eye disease (e.g.,peo-
ple with diabetes or a family history of eye disease;
African Americans,who are at higher risk for glaucoma) Visual acuity examination
and may need more frequent checkups. Also,if children
Visual acuity measures how clearly the patient can
seem to be having trouble in school,problems with read-
see. It is measured for each eye separately, with and
ing,rubbing their eyes when reading,etc.,an eye exam
without the current prescription. It is usually measured
may be necessary sooner.
with a Snellen eye chart,a poster with lines of different-
sized letters,each line with a number at the side denoting
Precautions the distance from which a person with normal vision can
read that line. Other kinds of eye charts with identifiable
The examiner needs to know if the patient is taking
figures are available for children or anyone unfamiliar
any medications or has any existing health conditions.
with the Roman alphabet. These charts are made to be
Some medications,even over-the-counter (OTC) medica-
placed at a certain distance (usually 20 ft) from the per-
tions can affect vision or even interfere with the eyedrops
son being tested. At this distance, people with normal
the doctor may use during the exam. Certain eyedrops
vision can read a certain line (usually the lowest),
would not be used if the patient has asthma,heart prob-
marked the 20/20 line; these people are said to have
lems,or other conditions.
20/20 vision. For people who can’t read the smallest line,
The patient may need someone to drive them home the examiner assigns a ratio based on the smallest line
in case the eyes were dilated. Bringing sunglasses to the they can read. The first number (numerator) of the ratio
exam may also help decrease the glare from light until is the distance between the chart and the patient,and the
the dilating drops wear off. second number (denominator) is the distance where a
person with normal vision would be able to read that
line. The ratio 20/40 means the patient can see at 20 ft.
Description
what people with normal vision can see at 40 ft. away.
An eye examination,given by an ophthalmologist or
When a patient is unable to read any lines on the
optometrist,costs about $100. It may or may not be cov-
chart,they are moved closer until they can read the line
ered by insurance. It begins with information from the
with the largest letters. The acuity is still measured the
patient (case history) and continues with a set of primary
same way. A ratio of 5/200 means the person being tested
tests,plus additional specialized tests given as needed,dic-
can see at 5 ft what a normal person can see 200 ft.
tated by the outcomes of initial testing and the patient’s
age. The primary tests can be divided into two groups, When a patient can’t read the chart at all,the exam-
those that evaluate the physical state of the eyes and sur- iner may hold up some fingers and ask the patient to
rounding areas,and those that measure the ability to see. count them at various distances,and records the result as
“counting fingers”at the distance of recognition. If the
The order of the tests for the exam may differ from
patient cannot count the examiner’s fingers at any dis-
doctor to doctor,however,most exams will include the
tance, the examiner determines if the patient can see
following procedures:
hand movements. If so,the result is recorded as “hand
movements.” If not, the examiner determines if the
Information gathering and initial observations
patient can detect light from a penlight. If the patient can
The examiner will take eye and medical histories that detect the light but not its direction,the result is recorded
include the patient’s chief complaint,any past eye disor- at “light perception.” If the patient can recognize its
1262 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitanimaxe
eyE
direction,the result is recorded as “light projection.”If
the patient cannot detect the light at all, the result is
recorded as “no light perception.”
Eye movement examination and cover tests
The examiner asks the patient to look up and down,
and to the right and left to see if the patient can move the
eyes to their full extent. The examiner asks the patient to
stare at an object,then quickly covers one eye and notes
any movement in the eye that remains uncovered. This
procedure is repeated with the other eye. This,and anoth-
er similar cover test, helps to determine if there is an
undetected eye turn or problem with fixation. The doctor
may also have the patient look at a pen and follow it as it
is moved close to the eyes. This checks convergence.
Iris and pupil examination
The doctor checks the pupil’s response to light (if it
After the refraction and other visual status tests,for
dilates and constricts appropriately). The iris is viewed
example color tests or binocularity tests (can the patient see
for symmetry and physical appearance. The iris is
3-D,or have depth perception),the doctor will check the
checked more thoroughly later using a slit lamp.
health of the eyes and surrounding areas. The main instru-
ments used are the ophthalmoscope and the slit lamp.
Refractive error determination-Refraction
The examiner will determine the refractive error and Ophthalmoscopic examination
obtain a prescription for corrective lenses for people
These observations are best accomplished after
whose visual acuity is less than 20/20. An instrument
dilating the pupils and require an ophthalmoscope. The
called a phoropter,which the patient sits behind,is gen-
ophthalmoscope most frequently used is a called a direct
erally used (sometimes the refraction can be done with a
ophthalmoscope. It is a hand-held illuminated 15X
trial frame that the patient wears). The phoropter is
multi-lens magnifier that lets the examiner view the
equipped with many lenses that allow the examiner to
inside back area of the eye (fundus). The retina, blood
test many combinations of corrections to learn which
vessels,optic nerve,and other structures are examined.
correction allows the patient to see the eye chart most
clearly. This is the part of the exam when the doctor usu-
Slit lamp examination
ally says,“Which is better,one or two?”The phoropter
also contains prisms, and sometimes the doctor will The slit lamp is a microscope with a light source that
intentionally make the patient see double. This may help can be adjusted. This magnifies the external and some
in determining a slight eye turn. The exam will check internal structures of the eyes. The lid and lid margin,
vision at distance and near (reading). cornea,iris,pupil,conjunctiva,sclera,and lens are exam-
A prescription for corrective lenses can also be sup- ined. The slit lamp is also used in contact lens evalua-
plied by automated refracting devices, which measure tions. A little probe called a tonometer may be used at
the necessary refraction by shining a light into the eye this time to check the pressure of the eyes. A colored eye-
and observing the reflected light. Another objective way drop may be instilled immediately prior to this test. The
to obtain a prescription is using a hand-held retinoscope. drop has a local anesthetic so the patient won’t feel the
As in the automated method just mentioned,the doctor probe touch the eye. It is a quick procedure.
shines a light in the patient’s eyes and can determine an
objective prescription. This is helpful in young children Visual field measurement
or infants.
A perimeter, the instrument for measuring visual
Sometimes drops will be instilled in the patient’s eyes fields, is a hollow hemisphere, equipped with a light
before this part of the exam. The drops may relax accom- source that projects dots of light over the inside surface.
modation so that the refraction will be more accurate. This The patient’s head is positioned so that the eye being
is helpful in children and people who are farsighted. tested is at the center of the sphere and 13 in (about 33
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1263
Eye
examination
A woman looking through a refractor.(Photograph by John
Greim, Photo Researchers.Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Amblyopia—Decreased visual acuity, usually in Macula—The central part of the retina where the
one eye, in the absence of any structural abnormali- rods and cones are densest.
ty in the eye.
Ophthalmoscope—An instrument designed to view
Conjunctiva—The mucous membrane that covers the structures in the back of the eye.
white part of the eyes (sclera) and lines the eyelids.
Optic nerve—The nerve that carries visual mes-
Cornea—Clear outer covering of the front of the eye.
sages from the retina to the brain.
Floaters—Translucent specks that float across the
Pupil—The circular opening that looks like a black
visual field, due to small objects floating in the vit-
hole in the middle of the iris.
reous humor.
Fundus—The inside of an organ. In the eye, refers to Retina—The inner, light-sensitive layer of the eye
the back area that can be seen with the ophthalmo- containing rods and cones; transforms the image it
scope. receives into electrical messages which are then
sent to the brain via the optic nerve.
Glaucoma—There are many types of glaucoma.
Glaucoma results in optic nerve damage and a Sclera—The tough, fibrous, white outer protective
decreased visual field and blindness if not treated. It covering that surrounds the eye.
is usually associated with increased IOP, but that is
Slit lamp—A microscope that projects a linear slit
not always the case. The three factors associated
beam of light onto the eye; allows viewing of the
with glaucoma are increased IOP, a change in the
conjunctiva, cornea, iris, aqueous humor, lens, and
optic nerve head, and changes in the visual field.
eyelid.
Gonioscope—An instrument used to inspect the
eye (e.g., the anterior chamber). It consists of a Tonometer—An instrument that measures intraocu-
magnifier and a lens equipped with mirrors; it’s lar pressure (IOP).
placed on the patient’s cornea.
Ultrasonography—A method of obtaining structural
Iris—The colored ring just behind the cornea and in information about internal tissues and organs where
front of the lens that controls the amount of light an image is produced because different tissues
sent to the retina. bounce back ultrasonic waves differently.
cm) from all points on the inside surface of the hemi- binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy, gonioscopy,
sphere. The patient stares straight ahead at an image on color tests, contrast sensitivity testing, ultasonogra-
the center of the surface and signals whenever he or she phy, and others. The patient may have to return for
detects a flash of light. The perimeter records which additional visits.
flashes are seen and which are missed and maps the
patient’s field of vision and blindspots.
Results
Intraocular pressure (IOP) measurement External observations
Tonometers are used to measure IOP. Some tonome- INITIAL OBSERVATIONS AND SLIT LAMP EXAM.
ters measure pressure by expelling a puff of air (noncon- Some general observations the doctor may be looking for
tact tonometer) towards the eyeball from a very short dis- include:head tilt; drooping eyelids (ptosis); eye turns;
tance. Other tonometers are placed directly on the cornea. red eyes (injection); eye movement; size, shape, and
The noncontact tonometers are not as accurate as the con- color of the iris; clarity of the cornea,anterior chamber,
tact tonometers and are sometimes used for screenings. and lens. The anterior chamber lies behind the cornea
and in front of the iris. If it appears cloudy or if cells can
be seen in it during the slit lamp exam an inflammation
Completing the evaluation with additional tests
may be present. A narrow anterior chamber may put the
Depending upon the results other tests may be patient at risk for glaucoma. A clouding of the normally
necessary. These can include, but are not limited to clear lens is called a cataract.
1264 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitanimaxe
eyE
Internal observations American Optometric Association. 243 North Lindbergh Blvd.,
St. Louis,MO 63141. (314) 991-4100. <http://www.
OPHTHALMOSCOPIC EXAM. The observations aoanet.org>.
include,but are not limited to the retina,blood vessels,
and optic nerve. The optic nerve enters the back of the
Lorraine Lica,PhD
eye and can be checked for swelling or other problems.
The blood vessels can be viewed as can the retina. The Eye exercises see Vision training
macula is a 3–5 mm area in the back of the eye and is
responsible for central vision. The fovea is a small area
located within the macula and is responsible for sharp
vision. When a person looks at something, they are
pointing the fovea at the object. Changes in the macular
area can be observed with the ophthalmoscope. Retinal Eye glasses and contact lenses
tears or detachments can also be seen.
Definition
Visual ability Eyeglasses and contact lenses are devices that cor-
rect refractive errors in vision. Eyeglass lenses are
VISUAL ACUITY. The refraction will determine the
mounted in frames worn on the face, sitting mostly on
refractive status for each eye for distance and for near. A
the ears and nose, so that the lenses are positioned in
prescription for glasses is made after taking many things
front of the eyes. Contact lenses appear to be worn in
into consideration. The eye doctor may alter a prescrip-
direct contact with the cornea,but they actually float on a
tion based upon many factors. Different materials for
layer of tears that separates them from the cornea.
glasses may be suggested. For example,polycarbonate
may be suggested for children or people active in sports
because it is very impact resistant. Bifocals, trifocals, Purpose
single-vision spectacles, and contact lenses are also
The purpose of eyeglasses and contact lenses is to
options.
correct or improve the vision of people with nearsighted-
VISUAL FIELDS. A normal visual field extends about ness (myopia),farsightedness (hyperopia),presbyopia,
60°upward,about 75°downward,about 65°toward the and astigmatism.
nose, and about 100° toward the ear and has one blind
spot close to the center. Defects in the visual field signify
Precautions
damage to the retina, optic nerve, or the neurological
visual pathway. People allergic to certain plastics should not wear
contact lenses or eyeglass frames or lenses manufactured
Seeing clearly does not necessarily mean the eyes
from that type of plastic. People allergic to nickel should
are healthy or that the eyes are working together as a
not wear Flexon frames. People at risk of being in acci-
team. Regular checkups can detect abnormalities,hope-
dents that might shatter glass lenses should wear plastic
fully before a problem arises. The eye doctor can suggest
lenses, preferably polycarbonate. (Lenses made from
ways to help protect the eyes and vision (e.g.,safety gog-
polycarbonate, the same type of plastic used for the
gles, ultraviolet (UV) coatings on lenses). A person
space shuttle windshield, are about 50 times stronger
should also have an eye exam if they notice a change in
than other lens materials.) Also,people at risk of receiv-
vision,eyestrain,blur,flashes of light,a sudden onset of
ing electric shock should avoid metal frames.
floaters (little dots),distortion of objects,double vision,
redness,painor discharge. People employed in certain occupations may be pro-
hibited from wearing contact lenses,or may be required
to wear safety eyewear over the contact lenses. Some
Resources
occupations, such as construction or auto repair, may
BOOKS require safety lenses and safety frames. Physicians and
Chang,David F. “Ophthalmologic Examination.”In General employers should be consulted for recommendations.
Ophthalmology.14th ed. Ed. Daniel Vaughan. Stamford:
Appleton & Lange,1995.
Description
ORGANIZATIONS
Eyes are examined by optometrists (O.D.) or by
American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,PO
Box 7424,San Francisco,CA 94120-7424. <http://www. ophthalmologists (M.D. or D.O.—doctor of osteopathy).
eyenet.org>. Prescriptions,if necessary,are then given to patients for
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1265
Eye
glasses
and
contact
lenses
glasses. The glasses are generally made by an optician. A for people with large refractive errors. A plastic called
separate contact lens-fitting exam is necessary if the CR-39, introduced in the 1960s, was more suitable.
patient wants contact lenses, because an eyeglass pre- Today,eyeglass wearers can also choose between poly-
scription is not the same as a contact lens prescription. carbonate, which is the most impact-resistant material
available for eyewear, and polyurethane, which has
exceptional optical qualities and an index of refraction of
Eyeglasses
up to 1.66, much higher than the conventional plastics
Over 140 million people in the United States wear used for lenses,and even higher than glass. Patients with
eyeglasses. People whose eyes have refractive errors do not high prescriptions should ask about high index material
see clearly without glasses,because the light emitted from options for their lenses. Aspheric lenses are also useful
the objects they are observing does not come into focus on for high prescriptions. They are flatter and lighter than
their retinas. For people who are farsighted,images come conventional lenses.
into focus behind the retina; for people who are nearsight-
There are many lenses and lens-coating options for
ed,images come into focus in front of the retina.
individual needs,including coatings that block the ultra-
LENSES. Lenses work by changing the direction of violet (UV) light or UV and blue light which have been
light so that images come into focus on the retina. The found to be harmful to the eyes. Such coatings are not
greater the index of refraction of the lens material and the needed on polycarbonate lenses,which already have UV
greater the difference in the curvature between the two protection. UV coatings are particularly important on
surfaces of the lens,the greater the change in direction of sunglasses and ski goggles. Sunglasses, when nonpre-
light that passes through it,and the greater the correction. scription,should be labeled with an indication that they
block out 99–100% of both UV-A and UV-B rays.
Lenses can be unifocal,with one correction for all
distances,or they can be correct for more than one dis- There are anti-scratch coatings that increase the
tance (multifocal). One type of multifocal,the bifocal, surface hardness of lenses (an important feature when
has an area of the lens (usually at the bottom) that cor- using plastic lenses) and anti-reflective (AR) coatings
rects for nearby objects (about 14 in from the eyes); the that eliminate almost all glare and allow other people to
remainder of the lens corrects for distant objects (about see the eyes of the wearer. AR coatings may be particu-
20 ft from the eyes). Another type of multifocal,a trifo- larly helpful to people who use computers or who drive
cal,has an area in-between that corrects for intermedi- at night. Mirror coatings that prevent other people from
ate distances (usually about 28 in). Conventional bifo- seeing the wearer’s eyes are also available. There is a
cals and trifocals have visible lines between the areas of whole spectrum of tints,from light tints to darker tints,
different correction; however,lenses where the correc- used in sunglasses. Tint, however, does not block-out
tion gradually changes from one area to the other,with- UV rays, so a UV coating is needed. Polaroid lenses
out visible lines,have been available since the 1970s. that block out much of the reflected light also allow bet-
Such lenses are sometimes called progressives or no- ter vision in sunny weather and are helpful for people
line bifocals. who enjoy boating. Photosensitive (photochromatic)
lenses that darken in the presence of bright light are
To be suitable for eyeglass lenses,a material must be
handy for people who don’t want to carry an extra set of
transparent, without bubbles, and have a high index of
glasses. Photochromatic lenses are available in glass
refraction. The greater the index of refraction,the thinner
and plastic.
the lens can be. Lenses are made from either glass or
plastic (hard resin). The advantage of plastic is that it is
FRAMES. Frames can be made from metal or plastic,
lightweight and more impact resistant than glass. The
and they can be rimless. There is an almost unlimited
advantage of glass is that it is scratch resistant and pro-
variety of shapes,colors,and sizes. The type and degree
vides the clearest possible vision.
of refractive correction in the lens determine to some
Glass was the first material to be used for eyeglass extent the type of frame most suitable. Some lenses are
lenses, and was used for several hundred years before too thick to fit in metal rims,and some large-correction
plastic was introduced. The crown glass used for eye- prescriptions are best suited to frames with small-area
glass lenses has an index of refraction of 1.52. lenses.
Optical-quality acrylic was introduced for eyeglass Rimless frames are the least noticeable type,and they
use in the early 1940s, but because it was easily are lightweight because the nosepiece and temples are
scratched,brittle,and discolored rapidly,it did not sup- attached directly to the lenses,eliminating the weight of
plant glass as the material of choice. Furthermore,it had the rims. They tend to not be as sturdy as frames with rims,
a relatively low index of refraction,so it wasn’t suitable so they are not a good choice for people who frequently
1266 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sesnel
tcatnoc
dna
sessalg
eyE
remove their glasses and put them on again. They are also vide a field of view unobstructed by eyeglass frames;
not very suitable for lenses that correct a high degree of they do not fog-up or get splattered,so it is possible to
farsightedness,because such lenses are thin at the edges. see well while walking in the rain; and they are less
noticeable than any eyeglass style. On the other hand,
Metal frames are less noticeable than plastic, and
they take time to get accustomed to; require more mea- they are lightweight. They are available in solid gold,
surements for fitting; require many follow-up visits to
gold-filled,anodized aluminum,nickel,silver,stainless
the eye doctor; can lead to complications such as infec-
steel,and now titanium and titanium alloy. Until the late
tions and corneal damage; and may not correct astigma-
1980s,when titanium-nickel alloy and titanium frames
tism as well as eyeglasses,especially if the astigmatism
were introduced, metal frames were, in general, more
is severe.
fragile than plastic frames. The titanium frames,howev-
er,are very strong and lightweight. An alloy of titanium Originally,hard contact lenses were made of a mate-
and nickel,called Flexon,is not only strong and light- rial called PMMA. Although still available, the more
weight,but returns to its original shape after being twist- common types of contact lenses are listed below:
ed or dented. It is not perfect for everyone, though,
•Rigid gas-permeable (RGP) daily-wear lenses are made
because some people are sensitive to its nickel. Flexon
of plastic that does not absorb water but allows oxygen
frames are also relatively expensive.
to get from the atmosphere to the cornea. (This is
Plastic frames are durable, can accommodate just important because the cornea has no blood supply and
about any lens prescription,and are available in a wide needs to get its oxygen from the atmosphere through
range of prices. They are also offered in a variety of plas- the film of tears that moves beneath the lens.) They
tics (including acrylic,epoxy,cellulose acetate,cellulose must be removed and cleaned each night.
propionate,polyamide,and nylon) and in different colors,
•Rigid gas-permeable (RGP) extended-wear lenses are
shapes, and levels of resistance to breakage. Epoxy
made from plastic that also does not absorb water but is
frames are resilient and return to their original shape after
more permeable to oxygen than the plastic used for
being deformed,so they do not need to be adjusted as fre-
daily-wear lenses. They can be worn up to a week.
quently as other types. Nylon frames are almost unbreak-
able. They revert to their original shape after extreme •Daily wear soft lenses are made of plastic that is per-
trauma and distortion; because of this property,though, meable to oxygen and absorbs water; therefore, they
they cannot be readjusted after they are manufactured. are soft and flexible. These lenses must be removed
and cleaned each night, and they do not correct all
FIT. The patient should have the distance between vision problems. Soft lenses are easier to get used to
the eyes (PD) measured,so that the optical centers of the
than rigid lenses, but are more prone to tears and do
lenses will be in front of the patient’s pupils. Bifocal
not last as long.
heights also have to be measured with the chosen frame
in place and adjusted on the patient. Again,this is so the •Extended-wear soft lenses are highly permeable to oxy-
lenses will be positioned correctly. If not positioned cor- gen, are flexible by virtue of their ability to absorb
rectly, the patient may experience eyestrain or other water, and can usually be worn for up to one week.
problems. This can occur with over-the-counter reading They do not correct all vision problems. There is more
glasses. The distance between the lenses is for a “stan- of a risk of infection with extended-wear lenses than
dard”person. Generally,this will not be a problem,but if with daily-wear lenses.
a patient is sensitive or has more closely set eyes, for •Extended-wear disposable lenses are soft lenses worn
example,it may pose a problem. Persons buying ready- continually for up to six days and then discarded,with
made sunglasses or reading glasses should hold them up no need for cleaning.
to see if they appear clear. They should also hold the
•Planned-replacement soft lenses are daily wear lenses
lenses to see an object with straight lines reflected off of
that are replaced on a regular schedule,which is usually
the lenses. If the lines don’t appear straight,the lenses
every two weeks,monthly,or quarterly. They must also
may be warped or inferior.
be cleaned.
Patients may sometimes need a few days to adjust to
Soft contact lenses come in a variety of materials.
a new prescription; however,problems should be report-
There are also different kinds of RGP and soft multifocal
ed,because the glasses may need to be rechecked.
contact lenses available. Monovision,where one contact
lens corrects for distance vision while the other corrects
Contact lenses
for near vision,may be an option for presbyopic patients.
Over 32 million people in the United States wear Monovision,however,may affect depth perception and
these small lenses that fit on top of the cornea. They pro- may not be appropriate for everyone. Contact lenses also
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1267
Eye
glasses
and
contact
lenses
KEY TERMS
Astigmatism—Assymetric vision defects due to Polymer—A substance formed by joining smaller
irregularities in the cornea. molecules. For example, plastic, acrylic, cellulose
acetate, cellulose propionate, nylon, etc.
Cornea—The clear outer covering of the front of the
eye. Presbyopia—A condition affecting people over the
age of 40 where the system of accommodation that
Index of refraction—A constant number for any
allows focusing of near objects fails to work
material for any given color of light that is an indi-
because of age-related hardening of the lens of the
cator of the degree of the bending of the light
eye.
caused by that material.
Retina—The inner, light-sensitive layer of the eye
Lens—A device that bends light waves.
containing rods and cones; transforms the image it
Permeable—Capable of allowing substances to pass receives into electrical messages sent to the brain
through. via the optic nerve.
Polycarbonate—A very strong type of plastic often Ultraviolet (UV) light—Part of the electromagnetic
used in safety glasses, sport glasses, and children’s spectrum with a wavelength just below that of visi-
eyeglasses. Polycarbonate lenses have approximate- ble light. It is damaging to living material, especial-
ly 50 times the impact resistance of glass lenses. ly eyes and DNA.
come in a variety of tints. Soft contacts are available that Risks
can change dark-colored eyes a different color. Even
Wearing contact lenses increases the risk of corneal
though such lenses have no prescription,they must still
damage and eye infections.
be fitted and checked to make sure that an eye infection
does not occur. People should NEVER wear someone
else’s contact lenses. This can lead to infection or dam-
Normal results
age to the eye.
The normal expectation is that people will achieve
20/20 vision while wearing corrective lenses.
Aftercare
Contact lens wearers must be examined periodical-
Resources
ly by their eye doctors to make sure that the lenses fit
BOOKS
properly and that there is no infection. Both infection
Zinn,Walter J.,and Herbert Solomon. Complete Guide to Eye-
and lenses that do not fit properly can damage the
care,Eyeglasses & Contact Lenses.4th ed. Federick Fell,
cornea. Patients can be allergic to certain solutions that
1997.
are used to clean or lubricate the lenses. For that reason,
patients should not randomly switch products unless
ORGANIZATIONS
they speak with their doctor. Contact lens wearers
American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,PO
should seek immediate attention if they experience eye
Box 7424,San Francisco,CA 94120-7424. <http://www.
pain,a burning sensation,red eyes,intolerable sensitiv- eyenet.org>.
ity to light, cloudy vision, or an inability to keep the American Optometric Association. 243 North Lindbergh Blvd.,
eyes open. St. Louis,MO 63141. (314) 991-4100. <http://www.
aoanet.org>.
To avoid infection, it is important for contact lens
Optician Association of America. 7023 Little RiverTurnpike,
wearers to exactly follow their instructions for lens inser-
Suite 207,Annandale,VA 22003. (703) 916- 8856.
tion and removal,as well as cleaning. Soft contact lens <http://www.opticians.org>.
wearers should never use tap water to rinse their lenses or
to make-up solutions. All contact lens wearers should OTHER
also always have a pair of glasses and a carrying case for Contact Lens Council.<http://www.contactlenscouncil.org>.
their contacts with them,in case the contacts have to be
removed due to eye irritation. Lorraine Lica,PhD
1268 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sesnel
tcatnoc
dna
sessalg
eyE
toward the center. For example,if an eye turns upward,
Eye muscle surgery the muscle at the bottom of the eye could be strengthened.
Rarely, eye muscle surgery is performed on people
Definition
with nystagmus or Duane syndrome. Nystagmus is a con-
Eye muscle surgery is surgery to weaken,strength- dition where one or both eyes move rapidly or oscillate; it
en,or reposition any of the muscles that move the eyeball can sometimes be helped by moving the eyes to the posi-
(the extraocular muscles). tion of least oscillation. Duane syndrome is a disorder
where there is limited horizontal eye movement; it can
Purpose sometimes be relieved by surgery to weaken an eye muscle.
The purpose of eye muscle surgery is generally to There are two methods to alter extraocular muscles.
align the pair of eyes so that they gaze in the same direc- Traditional surgery can be used to strengthen,weaken,or
tion and move together as a team, either to improve reposition an extraocular muscle. The surgeon first
appearance or to aid in the development of binocular makes an incision in the conjunctiva (the clear membrane
vision in a young child. To achieve binocular vision,the covering the sclera),then puts a suture into the muscle to
goal is to align the eyes so that the location of the image prevent it from getting lost and loosens the muscle from
on the retina of one eye corresponds to the location of the the eyeball with a surgical hook. During a resection,the
image on the retina of the other eye. muscle is detached from the sclera,a piece of muscle is
removed so the muscle is now shorter,and the muscle is
In addition,sometimes eye muscle surgery can help
reattached to the same place. This strengths the muscle.
people with other eye disorders (nystagmusand Duane
In a recession,the muscle is made weaker by reposition-
syndrome,for example).
ing it. More than one extraocular eye muscle might be
operated on at the same time.
Precautions
Another way of weakening eye muscles,using botu-
Depth perception (stereopsis) develops around the linum toxin injected into the muscle,was introduced in
age of three months old. For successful development of the early 1980s. Although the botulinum toxin wears off,
binocular vision and the ability to perceive three-dimen- the realignment may be permanent, depending upon
sionally,the surgery should not be postponed past the age whether neurological connections for binocular vision
of four. The earlier the surgery the better the outcome,so were established during the time the toxin was active.
an early diagnosis is important. Surgery may even be This technique can also be used to adjust a muscle after
performed before two years old. After surgery,if binocu- traditional surgery.
lar vision is to develop,corrective lenses and eye exercis-
The cost of eye muscle surgery is about $2,000–
es (vision therapy) will probably be necessary.
$4,000,and about 700,000 surgeries are performed annu-
ally in the United States.
Description
The extraocular muscles attach via tendons to the Preparation
sclera (the white, opaque, outer protective covering of
Patients should make sure their doctors are aware of
the eyeball) at different places just behind an imaginary
any medications that they are taking, even over-the-
equator circling the top,bottom,left,and right of the eye.
counter medications. Patients should not take aspirin,or
The other end of each of these muscles attaches to a part
any other blood-thinning medications for ten days prior
of the orbit (the eye socket in the skull). These muscles
to surgery,and should not eat or drink after midnight the
enable the eyes to move up, down, to one side or the
night before.
other,or any angle in between.
Normally both eyes move together,receive the same
Aftercare
image on corresponding locations on both retinas,and the
brain fuses these images into one three-dimensional Patients will need someone to drive them home after
image. The exception is in strabismuswhich is a disorder their surgery. They should continue to avoid aspirin and
where one or both eyes deviate out of alignment, most other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents for an addi-
often outwardly (exotropia) or toward the nose tional three days,but they can take acetaminophen(e.g.,
(esotropia). The brain now receives two different images, Tylenol). Patients should discuss this with the surgeon to
and either suppresses one or the person sees double be clear what medications they can or cannot take. Pain
(diplopia). This deviation can be adjusted by weakening will subside after two to three days, and patients can
or strengthening the appropriate muscles to move the eyes resume most normal activities within a few days. Again,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1269
Eye
muscle
surgery
young children about 35% of the time. There is no
KEY TERMS improvement,or the condition worsens 15–35% of the
time. A second operation may rectify less-than-perfect
Botulinum toxin (botulin)—A neurotoxin made by outcomes.
Clostridium botulinum; causes paralysis in high
doses, but is used medically in small, localized Resources
doses to treat disorders associated with involun-
BOOKS
tary muscle contraction and spasms, in addition to
Good,William V.,and Craig S. Hoyt. Strabismus Management.
strabismus.
Boston:Butterworth-Hienemann,1996.
Conjunctiva—The mucous membrane that covers Salmans,Sandra. Your Eyes:Questions You Have... Answers
the eyes and lines the eyelids. You Need.Allentown,PA:People’s Medical Society,
1996.
Extraocular muscles—The muscles (lateral rectus,
von Noorden,Gunter K. Binocular Vision and Ocular Motility:
medial rectus, inferior rectus, superior rectus, Theory and Management of Strabismus.5th ed. St.
superior oblique, and inferior oblique) that move Louis:Mosby-Year Book,1996.
the eyeball.
ORGANIZATIONS
Orbit—The cavity in the skull containing the eye- American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,PO
ball; formed from seven bones: frontal, maxillary, Box 7424,San Francisco,CA 94120-7424. <http://www.
sphenoid, lacrimal, zygomatic, ethmoid, and pala- eyenet.org>.
tine. American Academy of Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabis-
mus (AAPOS). <http://med-aapos.bu.edu>.
Retina—The inner, light-sensitive layer of the eye
containing rods and cones; transforms the image it OTHER
receives into electrical messages sent to the brain Olitsky,Scott E.,and Leonard B. Nelson. Strabismus Web
Book.4 May 1998 <http://www.smbs.buffalo.edu/oph/
via the optic nerve.
ped/webbook.htm>.
Sclera—The tough, fibrous, white outer protective
covering of the eyeball. Lorraine Lica,PhD
Strabismus—A disorder where the two eyes do not
point in the same direction. Eye training see Vision training
this may vary with the patient and the patient should dis-
cuss returning to normal activity with the surgeon. They Eyelid disorders
should not get their eyes wet for three to four days and
should refrain from swimming for 10 days. Operated eyes Definition
will be red for about two weeks.
An eyelid disorder is any abnormal condition that
affects the eyelids.
Risks
As with any surgery, there are risks involved. Eye Description
muscle surgery is relatively safe, but very rarely a cut
Eyelids consist of thin folds of skin, muscle, and
muscle gets lost and can not be retrieved. This,and other
connective tissue. The eyelids protect the eyes and spread
serious reactions,including those caused by anesthetics,
tears over the front of the eyes. The inside of the eyelids
can result in vision loss in the affected eye. Occasionally,
are lined with the conjunctiva of the eyelid (the palpebral
retinal or nerve damage occurs. Double vision is not
conjunctiva),and the outside of the lids are covered with
uncommon after eye muscle surgery. As mentioned earli-
the body’s thinnest skin. Some common lid problems
er,glasses or vision therapy may be necessary.
include the following:stye,blepharitis,chalazion,entro-
pion,ectropion,eyelid edema,and eyelid tumors.
Normal results
Stye
Cosmetic improvement is likely with success rate
estimates varying from about 65–85%. According to the A stye is an infection of one of the three types of eye-
best statistics as of 1998,binocular vision is improved in lid glands near the lid margins,at the base of the lashes.
1270 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sredrosid
dileyE
Chalazion
A chalazion is an enlargement of a meibomian gland
(an oil-producing gland in the eyelid),usually not associ-
ated with an infectious agent. More likely, the gland
opening is clogged. Initially,a chalazion may resemble a
stye,but it usually grows larger. A chalazion may also be
located in the middle of the lid and be internal.
Blepharitis
Blepharitis is the inflammation of the eyelid mar-
gins,often with scales and crust. It can lead to eyelash
loss,chalazia,styes,ectropion,corneal damage,exces-
sive tearing,and chronic conjunctivitis.
Entropion
Entropion is a condition where the eyelid margin
(usually the lower one) is turned inward; the eyelashes
touch the eye and irritate the cornea.
cause is unclear. It may also be caused by an overproduc-
Ectropion tion of oil by the meibomian glands. Blepharitis can be a
chronic condition that begins in early childhood and can
Ectropion is a condition where one or both eyelid
last throughout life. Symptoms can include itching,burn-
margins turn outward,exposing both the conjunctiva that
ing,a feeling that something is in the eye,inflammation,
covers the eye and the conjunctiva that lines the eyelid.
and scales or matted,hard crusts surrounding the eyelashes.
Eyelid edema
Entropion
Eyelid edema is a condition where the eyelids con-
Entropion usually results from aging,but sometimes
tain excessive fluid.
can be due to a congenital defect,a spastic eyelid muscle,
Eyelid tumors or a scar on the inside of the lid that could be from
surgery,injury,or disease. It is accompanied by exces-
Eyelids are susceptible to the same skin tumors as
sive tearing,redness,and discomfort.
the skin over the rest of the body,including noncancer-
ous tumors and cancerous tumors (basal cell carcinoma,
Ectropion
squamous cell carcinoma, malignant melanoma, and
sebaceous gland carcinoma). Eyelid muscles are suscep- Similar to entropion,the usual cause of ectropion is
tible to sarcoma. aging. It also can be due to a spastic eyelid muscle or a
scar,as in entropion. It also can be the result of allergies.
Symptoms are excessive tearing and hardening of the
Causes and symptoms
eyelid conjunctiva.
Stye
Eyelid edema
Styes are usually caused by bacterial staphylococcal
Eyelid edema is most often caused by allergic reac-
infections. The symptoms are painand inflammation in
tions,for example,allergies to eye makeup,eyedrops or
one or more localized regions near the eyelid margin.
other drugs,or plant allergens such as pollen. Trichinosis,
Chalazion a disease caused by eating undercooked meat,also causes
eyelid edema. However,swelling can also be caused by
A chalazion is caused by a blockage in the outflow
more serious causes, such as infection, and can lead to
duct of a meibomian gland. Symptoms are inflammation
orbital cellulitiswhich can threaten vision. Symptoms can
and swelling in the form of a round lump in the lid that
include swelling,itching,redness,or pain.
may be painful.
Blepharitis Eyelid tumors
Some cases of blepharitis are caused by bacterial Tumors found on the eyelids are caused by the same
infection and some by head lice, but in some cases, the conditions that cause these tumors elsewhere on the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1271
Eyelid
disorders
A chalazion on the eyelid.This condition is caused by an
obstruction of one of the meibomian glands which lubricate
the edge of the eyelid.(Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced
by permission.)
Blepharitis
Blepharitis is treated with hot compresses, with
antibiotic ointment,and by cleaning the eyelids with a
moist washcloth and then with baby shampoo. Good
hygiene is essential. If the blepharitis doesn’t clear up
with treatment or if it seems to be a chronic problem,the
patient may have acnerosacea. These patients may need
to see a dermatologist as well.
Entropion and ectropion
Both entropion and ectropion can be surgically cor-
rected. Prior to surgery,the lower lid of entropion can be
taped down to keep the lashes off the eye,and both can be
treated with lubricating drops to keep the cornea moist.
Eyelid edema
Patients with swollen eyelids should contact their
eye doctor. A severely swollen lid can press on the eye
and possibly increase the intraocular pressure. An infec-
tion needs to be ruled out. Or,something as simple as an
body. They are usually painless and may or may not be allergy to nail polish and then touching the eyes can
pigmented. Some possible causes include AIDS cause swelling. The best treatment for allergic eyelid
(Kaposi’s sarcoma) or increased exposure to ultraviolet edema is to find and remove the substance causing the
(UV) rays which may lead to skin cancer. allergy. When that is not possible,as in the case of plant
allergens, cold compresses and immunosuppresesive
drugs such as corticosteroid creams are helpful. Howev-
Diagnosis
er,steroids can cause cataractsand increase intraocular
An instrument called a slit lamp is generally used to pressure and patients must be very careful not to get the
magnify the structures of the eyes. The doctor may press cream in their eyes. This should not be done unless under
on the lid margin to see if oil can be expressed from the a doctor’s care. For edema caused by trichinosis, the
meibomian glands. The doctor may invert the lid to see trichinosis must be treated.
the inside of the lid. Biopsy is used to diagnose cancer-
ous tumors. Eyelid tumors
Cancerous tumors should be removed upon discov-
Treatment ery,and noncancerous tumors should be removed before
they become big enough to interfere with vision or eyelid
Stye
function. Eyelid tumors require special consideration
Styes are treated with warm-hot compresses for because of their sensitive location. It is important that
10–15 minutes,three to four times a day. Sometimes top- treatment not compromise vision,eye movement,or eye-
ical antibioticsmay be prescribed. If the initial treatment lid movement. Accordingly, eyelid reconstruction will
is ineffective,styes are lanced and drained. sometimes accompany tumor excision.
Chalazion Prognosis
About 25% of chalazia will disappear spontaneous- The prognosis for styes and chalazia is good to
ly,but hot compresses may speed the process. Because excellent. With treatment, blepharitis, ectropion, and
chalazia are inside the lid,topical medications are gener- entropion usually have good outcomes. The prognosis
ally of no benefit. Medication may need to be injected by for nonmalignant tumors,basal cell carcinoma,and squa-
the doctor into the chalazion or if that doesn’t help the mous cell carcinoma is good once they are properly
chalazion may need to be excised. If what appears to be a removed. Survival rate for malignant melanoma depends
chalazion recurs on the same site as any previous one,the upon how early it was discovered and if it was complete-
possibility of sebaceous gland carcinoma should be ly removed. Sebaceous carcinomas are difficult to detect,
investigated by biopsy. so poor outcomes are more frequent.
1272 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sredrosid
dileyE
A close-up of the eye of an elderly patient showing ectropi-
on of the lower eyelid.Ectropion is a condition in which the
eyelid turns away from the eye.The most common type is
senile ectropion (seen here),in which the droop of the eye-
lid is due to loss of tissue elasticity in old age and weak-
ness in the muscles surrounding the eye.(Photograph by Dr.
P.Marazzi, Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
All of these eyelid disorders,if not treated,can lead
to other, possibly serious vision problems—dry eye, KEY TERMS
astigmatism,or even vision loss,for example. An oph-
thalmologist or optometrist should be consulted. Allergen—A substance capable of inducing an
allergic response.
Prevention
Allergic reaction—An immune system reaction to
a substance in the environment; symptoms
Good lid hygiene is very important. Regular eyelid
include rash, inflammation, sneezing, itchy watery
washing with baby shampoo helps prevent styes, cha-
eyes, and runny nose.
lazia,blepharitis,and eyelid edema. To avoid these prob-
lems, it’s also important to refrain from touching and Conjunctiva—The mucous membrane that covers
rubbing the eyes and eyelids,especially with hands that the white part of the eyes and lines the eyelids.
have not just been washed.
Edema—A condition where tissues contain exces-
Blepharitis is associated with dandruff, which is sive fluid.
caused by a kind of bacteria that is one of the causes of
Meibomian gland—Oil-producing glands in the
blepharitis. Controlling dandruff by washing the hair,
eyelids that open near the eyelid margins.
scalp,and eyebrows with shampoo containing selenium
sulfide to kill the bacteria helps control the blepharitis.
When using anything near the eyes, it is important to
read the label or consult with a doctor first.
American Optometric Association. 243 North Lindbergh Blvd.,
Avoiding allergens helps prevent allergic eyelid St. Louis,MO 63141. (314) 991-4100. <http://www.
edema. Staying inside as much as possible when pollen aoanet.org>.
counts are high and eliminating the use of, or at least American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive
Surgery. 1133 West Morse Blvd,#201,Winter Park,FL
removing eye makeup thoroughly,or using hypo-aller-
32789. (407) 647-8839. <http://www.asoprs.org>.
genic makeup may help if the person is sensitive to those
substances. OTHER
“Eyelid Abnormalities.”Eye Clinic of Fairbanks.<http://www.
Sunscreen,UV-blocking sunglasses,and wide brim-
eyeclinicfbks.com/ECFLID.htm>.
med hats can help prevent eyelid tumors.
RxMed.<http://www.rxmed.com>.
Entropian and ectropian seem to be unpreventable.
Lorraine Lica,PhD
Resources
Eyelid edema see Eyelid disorders
BOOKS
Newell,Frank W. Ophthalmology:Principles and Concepts. Eyelid plastic surgery see Blepharoplasty
8th ed. St. Louis:Mosby,1996.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,PO
Box 7424,San Francisco,CA 94120-7424. <http://www.
eyenet.org>.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1273
Eyelid
disorders
F
Fabry’s disease see Lipidoses Description
Face lift surgery can be performed on an outpatient
basis with local anesthetics. Patients typically also
receive “twilight anesthesia,”an intravenous sedative that
helps to lower their awareness of the procedure being
Face lift performed.
There are a number of variations of face lift surgery.
Definition
Which one is used will depend on the patient’s facial
Face lift surgery is a cosmetic procedure that involves structure,how much correction is needed,and the prefer-
redirecting some of the skin and muscle tissue of the face ences of the surgeon performing the procedure. In a typi-
and neck to counter signs of agingproduced by gravity. cal face lift surgery,the surgeon begins by making an inci-
sion within the hairline just above the ear. The incision
continues down along the front edge of the ear,around the
Purpose
earlobe,and then up and behind the ear extending back
The purpose of face lift surgery, also known as into the hairline. The location of this incision is designed
facialplasty,rhytidoplasty,or cervicofacial rhytidectomy, to hide any sign of the procedure later. The same proce-
is to improve the appearance of the face by repositioning dure is repeated on the other side of the face. Using vari-
the skin and tightening some of the underlying muscle ous instruments,the surgeon will then work to separate the
and tissue. The procedure is designed to counter sagging skin of the face from its underlying tissue,moving down
and looseness in skin and muscle tissue caused by gravi- to the cheek and into the neck area and below the chin. Fat
ty as the patient ages. Face lift surgery will not erase all deposits over the cheeks and in the neck may be removed
facial wrinkles,as the term rhytidectomy (which literally surgically or with liposuctionat this time. The surgeon
means “surgical removal of wrinkles”) might imply. will then work to free up and tighten certain bands of mus-
Wrinkles around the mouth and eyes,for example,may cle and tissue that extend up from the shoulder,below the
benefit little from face lift surgery. Other procedures, chin,and up and behind the neck. If these muscles and tis-
such as blepharoplasty,chemical peel,or dermabrasion, sue are not tightened,the looseness and sagging appear-
also may be necessary. ance of the skin will return. The surgeon then trims excess
skin from the edges of the original incision,pulls the skin
back,and staples or sutures it into place.
Precautions
Patients with other medical conditions should consult
Preparation
with their primary physician before undergoing face lift
surgery. Lung problems,heart disease,and certain other Prior to the procedure,patients meet with their sur-
conditions can lead to a higher risk of complications. geon to discuss the surgery,clarify the results that can be
Patients who take medications that can alter the way their achieved, and discuss the potential problems that can
blood clots (including female hormones, aspirin, and occur. Having realistic expectations is important in any
some non-aspirin painrelievers) should stop these med- cosmetic procedure. Patients will learn,for example,that
ications prior to surgery to lower the risk that a hematoma although face lift surgery can improve the contour of the
will form. A hematoma,a pocket of blood below the skin, face and neck, other procedures will be necessary to
is the most frequent complication of face lift surgery. reduce the appearance of many wrinkles. As mentioned
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1275
KEY TERMS
Hematoma—A complication of surgery in which a
collection of blood forms below the skin.
Rhytidectomy—It literally means “wrinkle exci-
sion.” It is another, misleading, term for face lift
surgery.
Twilight anesthesia—An intravenous mixture of
sedatives and other medications that decreases
patients’ awareness of the procedure being per-
formed.
days after the procedure. The balance are removed seven
to 10 days later. Many patients return to work and limited
activities within two weeks of the procedure.
Risks
The major complication seen following face lift
surgery is a hematoma. If a hematoma forms,the patient
may have to return to have the stitches reopened to find
the source of the bleeding. Most hematomas form within
48 hours of surgery. The typical sign is pain or swelling
affecting one side of the face but not the other.
Another risk of face lift surgery is nerve damage.
Sometimes it can affect the patient’s ability to raise an
eyebrow,or distort his smile,or leave him with limited
earlier,patients will stop taking aspirin,birth control or
feeling in his earlobe. Most of these nerve injuries,how-
female hormones,and other medications affecting blood
ever,repair themselves within 2–6 months.
clotting about two weeks before the procedure. Some
physicians prescribe vitamin C and K in the belief that
Normal results
this promotes healing. Patients will also be advised to
stop smoking and to avoid exposure to passive smoke Some swelling and bruising is normal following face
before the procedure and afterward. Some surgeons also lift surgery. After these disappear,the patient should see
recommend antibioticsbe taken beforehand to limit the a noticeable improvement in the contour of his face and
risk of infection. Some surgeons also use a steroid injec- neck. Some fine wrinkling of the skin may be improved,
tion before or after the procedure,to reduce swelling. but deep wrinkles are likely to require another cosmetic
procedure to improve their appearance.
Aftercare
Abnormal results
After the surgery,a pressure bandage will be applied
In addition to the risks outlined above,other compli-
to the face to reduce the risk of hematoma. The patient
cations of face lift surgery include infection, scarring,
may spend a few hours resting in a recovery room to
and hair loss near incision lines.
ensure no bleeding has occurred. The patient then returns
home. Some surgeons recommend that the patient remain
reclining for the next 24 hours,consuming a liquid diet, Resources
and avoiding any movements that lead the neck to flex. Ice
BOOKS
packs for the first few days can help to reduce swelling
Asken,Saul. “Cervicofacial Rhytidectomy.”In Cosmetic
and lower the risk of hematoma. Patients continue taking Surgery of the Skin:Principles and Techniques,ed.
an antibiotic until the first stitches come out about five William P. Coleman. St. Louis:Mosby,1997.
1276 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tfil
ecaF
In a typical face lift surgery,the surgeon begins by making
an incision within the hairline just above the ear.The inci-
sion continues down along the front of the ear,around the
earlobe,and then up and behind the ear extending back
into the hairline,as shown above.The same procedure is
repeated on the other side of the face.The surgeon will
then separate the skin from the tissue,remove fat deposits
over the cheeks and neck,tighten up muscles and tissues
below the chin and upwards behind the neck.The surgeon
then trims excess skin from the original incision,pulls the
skin back,and sutures it into place.(Illustration by Electronic
Illustrators Group.)
Tardy Jr.,M. Eugene,and Mark Lingensmith.”Face-List Many persons with Munchausen go so far as to undergo
Surgery:Principles and Variations.”In Roenigk and major surgery repeatedly,and,to avoid detection,at sev-
Roenigk’s Dermatologic Surgery:Principles and eral locations. Many have been employed in hospitals or
Practice,ed. Randall K. Roenigk and Henry H. Roenigk. in health care professions. The syndrome’s onset is in
New York:Marcel Dekker,1996. early adulthood.
PERIODICALS
Matarasso,Alan. “Facialplasty.”Dermatologic Clinics,15 Munchausen by proxy
(Oct. 1997):649-658.
Springer,Rachelle C. “Rhytidectomy:From Consultation to Munchausen by proxy is the name given to facti-
Recovery.”Plastic Surgical Nursing,16 (Spring 1996): tious disorders in children produced by parents or
27-30. other caregivers. The parent may falsify the child’s
medical history or tamper with laboratory tests in
ORGANIZATIONS
order to make the child appear sick. Occasionally,they
American Society for Dermatologic Surgery. 930 N. Meacham
may actually injure the child to assure that the child
Road,PO Box 4014,Schaumburg,IL 60168-4014. (847)
330-9830. <http://www.asds-net.org>. will be treated.
American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons. 44
E. Algonquin Rd.,Arlington Heights,IL 60005. (847)
Ganser’s syndrome
228-9900. <http://www.plasticsurgery.org>.
Ganser’s syndrome is an unusual dissociative reac-
Richard H. Camer tion to extreme stressin which the patient gives absurd
or silly answers to simple questions. It has sometimes
Facial nerve paralysis see Bell’s palsy been labeled as psychiatric malingering, but is more
often classified as a factitious disorder.
Causes and symptoms
No single explanation of factitious disorders covers
Factitious disorders
all cases. These disorders are variously attributed to
Definition underlying personality disorders; child abuse; the wish
to repeat a satisfying childhood relationship with a doc-
Factitious disorders are a group of mental distur-
tor; and the desire to deceive or test authority figures.
bances in which patients intentionally act physically or
Also,the wish to assume the role of patient and be cared
mentally ill without obvious benefits. The name facti-
for is involved. In many cases,the suffering of a major
tious comes from a Latin word that means artificial.
personal loss has been implicated.
These disorders are not malingering,which is defined as
The following are regarded as indications of a facti-
pretending illness when the “patient”has a clear motive,
tious disorder:
such as financial gain.
•dramatic but inconsistent medical history
Description •extensive knowledge of medicine and/or hospitals
Patients with factitious disorders produce or exag- •negative test results followed by further symptom
gerate the symptoms of a physical or mental illness by a development
variety of methods,including contaminating urine sam-
•symptoms that occur only when the patient is not being
ples with blood, taking hallucinogens, injecting them-
observed
selves with bacteria to produce infections,and other sim-
•few visitors
ilar behaviors.
There are no reliable statistics on the frequency of •arguments with hospital staff or similar acting-out
factitious disorders,but they are more common in men behaviors
than in women. The following conditions are sometimes •eagerness to undergo operations and other procedures
classified as factitious disorders:
When patients with factitious disorders are confront-
ed,they usually deny that their symptoms are intentional.
Munchausen syndrome
They may become angry and leave the hospital. In many
Munchausen syndrome refers to patients whose cases they enter another hospital, which has led to the
factitious symptoms are dramatized and exaggerated. nickname “hospital hoboes.”
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1277
Factitious
disorders
Pascuzzi,Robert M.,and Mary C. Weber. “Conversion Disor-
KEY TERMS ders,Malingering,and Dissociative Disorders.”In Cur-
rent Diagnosis.Vol. 9. Ed. Rex B. Conn,et al. Philadel-
phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
Ganser’s syndrome—An unusual factitious disor-
“Psychiatric Disorders:Munchausen Syndrome.”In The Merck
der characterized by dissociative symptoms and
Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.16th ed. Ed. Robert
absurd answers to direct questions.
Berkow. Rahway,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,1992.
Malingering—Pretending to be sick in order to be Raney,David F. “Behavioral,Psychosocial & Psychiatric Pedi-
relieved of an unwanted duty or obtain some other atrics.”In Handbook of Pediatrics,edited by Gerald B.
Merenstein,et al. Norwalk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1994.
obvious benefit.
Munchausen by proxy—A factitious disorder in
Rebecca J. Frey
children produced by a parent or other caregiver.
Munchausen syndrome—A factitious disorder in Factor IX deficiency see Hemophilia
which the patient’s symptoms are dramatized and
Factor VIII deficiency see Hemophilia
exaggerated.
Diagnosis
Failure to thrive
Diagnosis of factitious disorders is usually based on
the exclusion of bona fide medical or psychiatric condi- Definition
tions,together with a combination of the signs listed ear-
Failure to thrive (FTT) is used to describe a delay in
lier. In some cases,the diagnosis is made on the basis of
a child’s growth or development. It is usually applied to
records from other hospitals.
infants and children up to two years of age who do not
gain or maintain weight as they should. Failure to thrive
Treatment is not a specific disease,but rather a cluster of symptoms
Treatment of factitious disorders is usually limited which may come from a variety of sources.
to prompt recognition of the condition and the refusal to
give unnecessary medications or to perform unneeded Description
procedures. Factitious disorder patients do not usually
Shortly after birth most infants loose some weight.
remain in the hospital long enough for effective psychi-
After that expected loss,babies should gain weight at a
atric treatment. Some clinicians have tried psychothera-
steady and predictable rate. When a baby does not gain
peutic treatment for factitious disorder patients,and there
weigh as expected,or continues to loose weight,it is not
are anecdotal reports that antidepressant or antipsychotic
thriving. Failure to thrive may be due to one or more
medications are helpful in certain cases.
conditions.
Organic failure to thrive (OFTT) implies that the
Prognosis
organs involved with digestion and absorption of food
Some patients have only one or two episodes of fac- are malformed or incomplete so the baby cannot digest
titious disorders; others develop a chronic form that may its food. Non-organic failure to thrive (NOFTT) is the
be lifelong. Successful treatment of the chronic form most common cause of FTT and implies the baby is not
appears to be rare. receiving enough food due to economic factors or
parental neglect,or do to psychosocial problems.
Resources
Causes and symptoms
BOOKS
Eisendrath,Stuart J. “Psychiatric Disorders.”In Current Med-
Occasionally,there may be an underlying physical
ical Diagnosis & Treatment 1998.37th ed. Ed. Stephen J.
condition that inhibits the baby’s ability to take in,digest,
McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997.
or process food. These defects can occur in the esopha-
“Factitious Disorders.”In Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
gus, stomach, small or large intestine, rectum or anus.
Mental Disorders.4th ed. Washington,DC:The American
Usually the defect is an incomplete development of the
Psychiatric Association,1994.
Noll,Richard. The Encyclopedia of Schizophrenia and the Psy- organ,and it must be surgically corrected. Most physical
chotic Disorders.New York:Facts On File,1992. defects can be detected shortly after birth.
1278 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
evirht
ot
eruliaF
Failure to thrive may also result from lack of avail-
able food or the quality of the food offered. This can be KEY TERMS
due to economic factors in the family,parental beliefs and
concepts of nutrition,or neglect of the child. In addition, Esophagus—The muscular tube which connects
if the baby is being breast fed,the quality or quantity of the mouth and stomach.
the mother’s milk may be the source of the problem.
Psychosocial—A term referring to the mind’s abili-
Psychosocial problems,often stemming from a lack ty to, consciously or unconsciously, adjust and
of nurturing parent-child relations can lead to a failure to relate the body to its social environment.
thrive. The child may exhibit poor appetite due to depres-
sion from insufficient attention from parents.
Infants and toddlers,whose growth is substantially
less than expected,are considered to be suffering from When failure to thrive is identified and corrected
FTT. early,most children catch up to their peers and remain
healthy and well developed.
Diagnosis
Prevention
Most babies are weighed at birth and that weight is
Initial failure to thrive caused by physical defects
used as a base line for future well-baby check-ups. If the
cannot be prevented but can often be corrected before
baby is not gaining weight at a predictable rate,the doc-
they become a danger to the child. Maternal education
tor will do a more extensive examination. If there are no
and emotional and economic support systems all help to
apparent physical deformities in the digestive tract,the
prevent failure to thrive in those cases where there is no
doctor will examine the child’s environment. As part of
physical deformity.
that examination,the doctor will look at the family histo-
ry of height and weight. In addition,the parents will be
asked about feedings,illnesses,and family routines. If Resources
the mother is breastfeeding the doctor will also evaluate ORGANIZATIONS
her diet,general health,and well being as it affects the American Humane Association,Children’s Division. 63 Inver-
quantity and quality of her milk. ness Drive East,Englewood,CO 80112-5117. (800) 227-
4645. <www.americanhumane.org>.
Diagnosis of FTT is confirmed by a positive growth
Federation for Children With Special Needs. 1135 Tremont
and behavioral response to increased nutrition.
Street,Suite 420,Boston,MA 02120. (617) 236-7210.
<http://www.fcsn.org>.
Treatment National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse. 2 Infor-
mation Way,Bethesda,MD 20892-3570. (800) 891-5389.
If there is an underlying physical reason for failure <http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health/digest/nddic. htm>.
to thrive,such as a disorder of swallowing mechanism or
Dorothy Elinor Stonely
intestinal problems, correcting that problem should
reverse the condition. If the condition is caused by envi-
ronmental factors, the physician will suggest several
ways parents may provide adequate food for the child.
Maternal education and parental counseling may also be
recommended. In extreme cases, hospitalization or a Fainting
more nurturing home may be necessary.
Definition
Fainting is loss of consciousness caused by a tempo-
Prognosis
rary lack of oxygen to the brain. Known by the medical
The first year of life is important as a foundation for term “syncope,”fainting may be preceded by dizziness,
growth and physical and intellectual development in the nausea,or a feeling of extreme weakness.
future. Children with extreme failure to thrive in the first
year may never catch up to their peers even if their physi-
Description
cal growth improves. In about one third of these extreme
cases, mental development remains below normal and When a person faints, the loss of consciousness is
roughly half will continue to have psychosocial and eat- brief. The person will wake up as soon as normal blood
ing problems throughout life. flow is restored to the brain. Blood flow is usually
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1279
Fainting
associated with weakness in the limbs or a temporary
problem in speaking caused by obstructed blood flow in
vessels passing through the neck to the brain. Pregnant
women frequently feel faint. Fainting may also occur as a
result of low blood sugar. Low blood sugar can occur if a
person skips a meal or has diabetes.
Fainting can also be caused by:
•prolonged coughing
•straining to defecate or urinate
•blowing a wind instrument too hard
•remaining in a stuffy environment with too little oxygen
Sometimes fainting may be caused by a temporary
drop in the blood supply to the brain caused by a tran-
sient ischemic attack(TIA). A TIA,sometimes called a
mini-stroke, is a disruption in the blood supply to the
brain caused by a blocked or burst blood vessel. Seek
help immediately if a fainting spell is followed by one or
more of the symptoms listed below:
•numbness or tingling in any body part
•blurred vision
•confusion
•difficulty speaking
restored by lying flat for a short time. This position puts
•loss of movement in arms or legs
the head on the same level as the heart so that blood
flows more easily to the brain. A few seconds before fainting,a person may sweat
or become pale,feel nauseated or dizzy,and have blurred
A fainting episode may be completely harmless and
vision or racing heartbeat. Once the person loses con-
of no significance,but it can be a symptom of a serious
sciousness,the pupils may dilate as the heart rate slows
underlying disorder. No matter how trivial it seems, a
down. There may be abnormal movements. Muscles may
fainting episode should be treated as a medical emer-
tighten or the back may arch. These movements do not
gency until the cause is determined.
last long and they are not violent.
In most cases, the patient regains consciousness
Causes and symptoms
within a few minutes,but the fainting spell may be fol-
Extreme pain,fear,or stressmay bring on fainting.
lowed by nervousness,headache,nausea,dizziness,pal-
This type of fainting is caused by overstimulation of the
lor or sweating. The person may faint again,especially if
vagus nerve,a nerve connected to the brain that helps con-
he or she stands up within 30 minutes.
trol breathing and circulation. In addition,a person who
stands still or erect for too long may faint. This type of
Diagnosis
fainting occurs because blood pools in the leg veins,
reducing the amount that is available for the heart to pump Most episodes of fainting are a one-time occurrence.
to the brain. This type of fainting is quite common in older When a person experiences repeated fainting spells, a
people or those taking drugs to treat high blood pressure. physician should be consulted.
When an older person feels faint upon turning the
head or looking upward suddenly, the cause could be Treatment
osteoarthritisof the neck bones. Osteoarthritis damages
Most of the time,a person who faints ends up lying
the cartilage between the neck bones and causes pressure
on the floor. If this happens,the patient should be rolled
on blood vessels leading to the brain.
onto his or her back. Because someone who faints often
Fainting can be a symptom of a disease such as vomits,bystanders should keep the airway open. A per-
Stokes-Adams syndrome, a condition in which blood son who is fainting should not be held upright or in a sit-
flow to the brain is temporarily reduced because of an ting position. These positions prevent blood flow to the
irregular heartbeat. Some people may experience fainting brain and may bring on a seizure.
1280 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gnitniaF
If a person is feeling faint,unconsciousness may be pre-
vented by sitting with the head between the knees,as
shown in the illustration above,or by lying flat with the legs
raised.Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
A person who has fainted should lie flat for 10–15
KEY TERMS minutes after regaining consciousness to give the system
a chance to regain its balance. Standing up too soon may
Osteoarthritis—A disease characterized by dam- bring on another fainting spell.
age to the cartilage in the joints. The joints
become inflamed, deformed, and enlarged, and Resources
movement becomes painful.
BOOKS
Stokes-Adams syndrome—Recurrent episodes of Greenberg,David A.,et al. Clinical Neurology.2nd ed. Nor-
temporary loss of consciousness (fainting) caused walk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1993.
by an insufficient flow of blood from the heart to
the brain. This syndrome is caused by a very rapid Carol A. Turkington
or a very slow heartbeat.
Falciparum malaria see Malaria
Transient ischemic attack (TIA)—A brief interrup-
tion of the blood supply to part of the brain that Fallopian tube ligation see Tubal ligation
causes a temporary impairment of vision, speech,
Fallopian tube removal see Salpingectomy
or movement. Usually, the episode lasts for just a
few moments, but it may be a warning sign for a Fallopian tube x rays see
full-scale stroke.
Hysterosalpingography
Vagus nerve—A cranial nerve, that is, a nerve con-
Famciclovir see Antiviral drugs
nected to the brain. The vagus nerve has branches
to most of the major organs in the body, including
the larynx, throat, windpipe, lungs, heart, and
most of the digestive system.
Familial Mediterranean fever
Bystanders should check the patient’s breathing and Definition
pulse rate. The pulse may be weak and slow. If there are
Familial Mediterranean fever(FMF) is an inherited
no signs of breathing or heart rate,the problem is more
disorder of the inflammatory response characterized by
serious than fainting,and cardiopulmonary resuscita-
recurring attacks of fever,accompanied by intense pain
tion(CPR) must begin.
in the abdomen, chest, or joints. Attacks usually last
If breathing and pulse rates seem normal,the person’s
12–72 hours,and can occasionally involve a skin rash.
legs should be raised above the level of the head so that
Kidney disease is a serious concern if the disorder is not
gravity can help the blood flow to the brain. Belts,collars
treated. FMF is most prevalent in people of Armenian,
or any other constrictive clothing should be loosened.
Sephardic-Jewish,Arabic,and Turkish ancestry.
If the person does not regain consciousness within a
minute or two after fainting, medical help should be
Description
summoned.
FMF could be described as a disorder of “inappro-
Prognosis priate”inflammation. That is,an event that in a normal
situation causes a mild or unnoticeable inflammation
After a fainting spell,the person should regain nor-
might cause a severe inflammatory response in someone
mal color but may continue to feel weak for a short time.
with FMF. Certain areas of the body are at risk for FMF-
Lying down quietly for a few moments may help.
related symptoms. A serosa is a serous (fluid-producing)
In most cases,an attack of fainting is not serious. As membrane that can be found inside the abdominal cavity
soon as the underlying pain or stress passes,the danger (peritoneum),around the lungs (pleura),around the heart
of repeated episodes also is eliminated. (pericardium), and inside the joints (synovium). The
symptoms of FMF are due to inflammation of one or
Prevention more of the serosal membranes (serositis). Thus,FMF is
also sometimes called recurrent polyserositis.
If a person is feeling faint,unconsciousness may be
prevented by sitting with the head between the knees or During an attack, large numbers of neutrophils, a
lying flat with the legs raised. type of white blood cell, move into the affected areas
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1281
Familial
Mediterranean
fever
causing painful inflammation and fever. These Causes and symptoms
episodes may be accompanied by a skin rash or joint
FMF is a genetic condition inherited in an autosomal
pain. In a few cases, chronic arthritis is a problem.
recessive fashion. Mutations in the MEFV gene (short
Amyloidosis is a potentially serious condition in
for Mediterranean Fever) on chromosome number 16 are
which proteins called amyloids are mistakenly pro-
the underlying cause of FMF. Autosomal recessive inher-
duced and deposited in organs and tissues throughout
itance implies that a person with FMF has mutations in
the body. Left untreated, amyloidosis often leads to
both copies of the MEFV gene. All genes come in pairs,
kidney failure, which is the major long-term health
and one copy of each pair is inherited from each parent.
risk in FMF.
If neither parent of a child with FMF has the condition,it
In most cases,the attacks of fever and pain are first means they carry one mutated copy of the MEFV gene,
noticed in childhood or adolescence. The interval but also one normal copy, which is enough to protect
between these episodes may be days or months,and is them from disease. If both parents carry the same autoso-
not predictable. However,during these intervals people mal recessive gene,there is a one in four chance in each
with FMF typically lead normal lives. It is not entirely pregnancy that the child will inherit both recessive
clear what brings on an attack, but people with FMF genes,and thus have the condition.
often report mild physical trauma,physical exertion,or
The MEFV gene carries the instructions for produc-
emotional stress just prior to the onset of symptoms.
tion of a protein called pyrin,named for pyrexia,a med-
Treatment for FMF involves an oral medication called
ical term for fever. The research group in France that co-
colchicine,which is highly effective for the episodes of
discovered the protein named it marenostrin,after ancient
fever and pain,as well as for amyloidosis and the kidney
Latin words that referred to the Mediterranean Sea. The
disease that can result from it.
movement of neutrophils into an area of the body where
FMF is most common in certain ethnic groups from trauma or infection has occurred is the major cause of
the eastern Mediterranean region,but cases in other eth- inflammation,which is a normal process. Research has
nic groups in other parts of the world are increasingly shown that pyrin has some function in controlling neu-
being reported. FMF is also known by many other trophils. In a situation where minor trauma or stress
names. They include:recurrent hereditary polyserositis, occurs,some initial inflammation may follow,but a func-
benign paroxysmal peritonitis,familial paroxysmal pol- tional pyrin protein is responsible for shutting-down the
yserositis,paroxysmal polyserositis,familial recurrent response of neutrophils once they are no longer needed.
polyserositis,periodic fever,periodic amyloid syndrome, An abnormal pyrin protein associated with FMF may be
periodic peritonitis syndrome,Reimann periodic disease, partly functional, but unstable. In some instances, the
Reimann syndrome, Siegel-Cattan-Mamou syndrome, abnormal pyrin itself seems to be “stressed”,and loses its
and Armenian syndrome. ability to regulate neutrophils and inflammation. Left
Estimates of the incidence of FMF in specific east- unregulated,a normal,mild inflammation spirals out of
ern Mediterranean populations range from 1 in 2000 to 1 control. Exactly what causes pyrin in FMF to lose its abil-
in 100, depending on the population studied. Specific ity to control neutrophils in some situations is not known.
mutations in the MEFV gene are more common in cer-
The recurrent acute attacks of FMF typically begin
tain ethnic groups,and may cause a somewhat different
in childhood or adolescence. Episodes of fever and
course of the disease. A few mutations in the MEFV
painful inflammation usually last 12–72 hours. About
gene likely became common in a small population in the
90% of people with FMF have their first attack by age
eastern Mediterranean several thousand years ago. It is
20. The group of symptoms that characterizes FMF
postulated that carrying a single copy of a mutated gene
includes the following:
produced a modified (but not abnormal) inflammatory
response that may have been protective against some
Fever
infectious agent at that time. Those who carried a single
“beneficial”mutation in the MEFV gene were more like- An FMF attack is nearly always accompanied by a
ly to survive and reproduce,which may explain the high fever,but it may not be noticed in every case. Fevers are
carrier frequency (up to one in five) in some populations. typically 100–104°F (38–40°C). Some people experi-
People of Armenian, Sephardic-Jewish, Arabic, and ence chills prior to the onset of fever.
Turkish ancestry are at greatest risk for FMF. However,a
better understanding and recognition of the symptoms of
Abdominal pain
FMF in recent years has resulted in more reports of the
condition in other ethnic groups, such as Italians and Nearly all people with FMF experience abdominal
Armenian-Americans. pain at one point or another,and for most it is the most
1282 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
revef
naenarretideM
lailimaF
KEY TERMS
Acute phase reactants—Blood proteins whose con- Neutrophil—The primary type of white blood cell
centrations increase or decrease in reaction to the involved in inflammation. Neutrophils are a type of
inflammation process. granulocyte, also known as a polymorphonuclear
leukocyte.
Amyloid—A waxy translucent substance composed
mostly of protein, that forms plaques (abnormal
Pericarditis—Inflammation of the pericardium, the
deposits) in the brain. membrane surrounding the heart.
Amyloidosis—Accumulation of amyloid deposits in
Peritonitis—Inflammation of the peritoneum, the
various organs and tissues in the body such that
membrane surrounding the abdominal contents.
normal functioning of an organ is compromised.
Colchicine—A compound that blocks the assembly Pleuritis—Inflammation of the pleura, the mem-
of microtubules–protein fibers necessary for cell brane surrounding the lungs.
division and some kinds of cell movements, includ-
Pyrexia—A medical term denoting fevers.
ing neutrophil migration. Side effects may include
diarrhea, abdominal bloating, and gas. Serositis—Inflammation of a serosal membrane.
Polyserositis refers to the inflammation of two or
Leukocyte—A white blood cell. The neutrophils are
more serosal membranes.
a type of leukocyte.
Leukocytosis—An increase in the number of leuko- Synovitis—Inflammation of the synovium, a mem-
cytes in the blood. brane found inside joints.
common complaint. The pain can range from mild to Skin rash
severe, and can be diffuse or localized. It can mimic
A rash, described as erysipelas-like erythema,
appendicitis,and many people with undiagnosed FMF
accompanies attacks in a minority of people,and most
have had appendectomies or exploratory surgery of the
often occurs on the front of the lower leg or top of the
abdomen done, only to have the fever and abdominal
foot. The rash appears as a red,warm,swollen area about
pain return.
4–6 in (10–15 cm) in diameter.
Chest pain
Amyloidosis
Pleuritis,also called pleurisy,occurs in up to half of
FMF is associated with high levels in the blood of
the affected individuals in certain ethnic groups. The
a protein called serum amyloid A (SAA). Over time,
pain is usually on one side of the chest. Pericarditis
excess SAA tends to be deposited in tissues and organs
would also be felt as chest pain.
throughout the body. The presence and deposition of
excess SAA is known as amyloidosis. Amyloidosis
Joint pain may affect the gastrointestinal tract, liver, spleen,
heart, and testes, but effects on the kidneys are of
About 50% of people with FMF experience joint
greatest concern. The frequency of amyloidosis varies
pain during attacks. The pain is usually confined to one
among the different ethnic groups,and its overall inci-
joint at a time,and often involves the hip,knee,or ankle.
dence is difficult to determine because of the use of
For some people, however, the recurrent joint pain
colchicine to avert the problem. Left untreated,howev-
becomes chronic arthritis.
er, those individuals who do develop amyloidosis of
the kidneys may require a renal transplant,or may even
Myalgia
die of renal failure. The frequency and severity of a
Up to 20% of individuals report muscle pain. These person’s attacks of fever and serositis seem to have no
episodes typically last less than two days, and tend to relation to whether they will develop amyloidosis. In
occur in the evening or after physical exertion. Rare fact,a few people with FMF have been described who
cases of muscle pain and fever lasting up to one month have had amyloidosis but apparently no other FMF-
have been reported. related symptoms.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1283
Familial
Mediterranean
fever
Other symptoms Some years ago, colchicine was discovered to also be
effective in reducing the frequency and severity of
A small percentage of boys with FMF develop
attacks in FMF. Treatment for FMF at this point consists painful inflammation around the testes,headaches are a
of taking colchicine daily. Studies have shown that about
common occurrence during attacks,and certain types of
75% of FMF patients achieve complete remission of
vasculitis(inflammation of the blood vessels) seem to be
their symptoms,and about 95% show marked improve-
more common in FMF.
ment when taking colchicine. Lower effectiveness has
been reported,but there is some question about the num-
Diagnosis
ber of FMF patients who choose not to take their
Individually,the symptoms that define FMF are com- colchicine between attacks when they are feeling well,
mon. Fevers occur for many reasons, and nonspecific and thus lose some of the ability to prevent attacks. Com-
pains in the abdomen,chest,and joints are also frequent pliance with taking colchicine every day may be ham-
ailments. Several infections can result in symptoms simi- pered by its side effects,which include diarrhea,nausea,
lar to FMF (Mallaret meningitis,for instance),and many abdominal bloating,and gas. There is a theoretical risk
people with FMF undergo exploratory abdominal surgery that colchicine use could damage chromosomes in
and ineffective treatments before they are finally diag- sperms and eggs,or in an embryo during pregnancy,or
nosed. Membership in a less commonly affected ethnic that it might reduce fertility. However,studies looking at
group may delay or hinder the correct diagnosis. reproduction in men and women who have used
colchicine have so far not shown any increased risks.
In general,symptoms involving one or more of the
Colchicine is also effective in preventing, delaying, or
following broad groups should lead to suspicion of FMF:
reversing renal disease associated with amyloidosis.
Unexplained recurrent fevers, polyserositis, skin rash,
and/or joint pain; abnormal blood studies (see below); Other medications may be used as needed to deal
and renal or other disease associated with amyloidosis. A with the pain and fever associated with FMF attacks.
family history of FMF or its symptoms would obviously Dialysis and/or renal transplant might become necessary
be an important clue, but the recessive nature of FMF in someone with advanced kidney disease. Given its
means there usually is no family history. The diagnosis genetic nature,there is no cure for FMF,nor is there likely
may be confirmed when a person with unexplained fever to be in the near future. Any couple that has a child diag-
and pain responds to treatment with colchicine since nosed with FMF,or anyone with a family history of the
colchicine is not known to have a beneficial effect on any condition (especially those in high-risk ethnic groups),
other condition similar to FMF. Abnormal results on a should be offered genetic counselingto obtain the most
blood test typically include leukocytosis(elevated num- up-to-date information on FMF and testing options.
ber of neutrophils in the blood),an increased erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate(rate at which red blood cells
Prognosis
form a sediment in a blood sample),and increased levels
of proteins associated with inflammation (called acute For those individuals who are diagnosed early
phase reactants) such as SAA. enough and take colchicine consistently,the prognosis is
excellent. Most will have very few, if any, attacks of
Direct analysis of the MEFV gene for FMF muta-
fever and polyserositis,and will likely not develop seri-
tions is the only method to be certain of the diagnosis.
ous complications of amyloidosis. The problem of misdi-
However,it is not yet possible to detect all MEFV gene
agnosing FMF continues,but education attempts directed
mutations that might cause FMF. Thus,if DNA analysis
at both the public and medical care providers should
is negative,clinical methods must be relied upon. If both
improve the situation. Future research should provide a
members of a couple were proven to be FMF carriers
better understanding of the inflammation process,focus-
through genetic testing,highly accurate prenatal diagno-
ing on how neutrophils are genetically regulated. That
sis would be available in any subsequent pregnancy.
information could then be used to develop treatments for
Similar syndromes of periodic fever and inflamma- FMF with fewer side effects, and might also assist in
tion include familial Hibernian fever and hyperim- developing therapies for other diseases in which abnor-
munoglobulinemia D syndrome,but both are more rare mal inflammation and immune response are a problem.
than FMF.
Resources
Treatment
BOOKS
Colchicine is a chemical compound that can be used Kastner,Daniel L. “Intermittent and Periodic Arthritic Syn-
as a medication,and is frequently prescribed for gout. dromes.”In Arthritis and Allied Conditions:A Textbook of
1284 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
revef
naenarretideM
lailimaF
Rheumatology. 13th ed. Ed. William J. Koopman. Balti- coli,familial colonic polyposis,multiple familial polypo-
more:Williams & Wilkins,1996. sis,familial adenomatous colon polyposis,adenomatosis
Sha’ar,Khuzama H.,and Haroutone K. Armenian. “Familial of the colon and rectum (ACR),and familial adenoma-
Paroxysmal Polyserositis (Familial Mediterranean tous polyposis (FAP). The last term and its abbreviation
Fever).”In Genetic Disorders Among Arab Populations,
have been commonly used since the early 1990s. It will
ed. Ahmad S. Teebi,and Talaat I. Faraq. New York:
be used in this discussion.
Oxford University Press,1997.
Familial polyposis or familial adenomatous poly-
PERIODICALS
posis (FAP) is a premalignant disease. This means that
Ben-Chetrit,Eldad,and Micha Levy. “Familial Mediterranean
a person with FAP, if left untreated, will invariably
Fever.”The Lancet351 (28 Feb. 1998):659-64.
develop cancer. Individuals with this disorder grow
Kastner,Daniel L. “Familial Mediterranean Fever:The Genet-
hundreds of polyps throughout their large intestines.
ics of Inflammation.”Hospital Practice33 (15 Apr.
1998):131-146. The polyps,which may also be called adenomas,com-
Samuels,Jonathan,et al. “Familial Mediterranean Fever at the monly develop just after puberty. Approximately half
Millennium:Clinical Spectrum,Ancient Mutations,and a of all FAP patients will have polyps by age 14. Ninety
Survey of 100 American Referrals to the National Insti- percent will have detectable polyps by age 25. Usually
tutes of Health.”Medicine77 (July 1998):268-97. by age 35–40,one or more of these polyps will become
cancerous.
ORGANIZATIONS
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin FAP is a rare disease. One in 8,000 people in the
Diseases. National Institutes of Health,One AMS Circle,
United States have FAP. However,it may be very com-
Bethesda,MD 20892. <http://www.nih.gov/niams>.
mon in affected families. FAP is inherited in an autoso-
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD). PO Box
mal dominant pattern. This means that a person with FAP
8923,New Fairfield,CT 06812-8923. (203) 746-6518 or
has a 50% chance of passing the condition down to each
(800) 999-6673. Fax:(203) 746-6481. <http://www.
of their children. FAP can also develop in someone with
rarediseases.org>.
National Society of Genetic Counselors. 233 Canterbury Dr., no family history of the disorder, due to a new genetic
Wallingford,PA 19086-6617. (610) 872-1192. <http:// mutation in that individual. It is thought that approxi-
www.nsgc.org/GeneticCounselingYou.asp>. mately one percent of all colorectal cancers in the United
States can be attributed to FAP.
Scott J. Polzin,M.S.
Causes and symptoms
FAP is caused by a portion of a gene that mutates or
changes. The original cause of the mutation is unknown.
Familial polyposis
Its exact role in FAP is not completely clear. Researchers
theorize that the normal gene directs the manufacture of
Definition
a protein which helps control cell growth. The mutated
Familial polyposis is an inherited condition which gene section in FAP generates an abnormal protein
primarily affects the large intestine (colon and rectum). which does not perform its normal function. Cells grow
Large numbers of projecting masses of swollen and out of control, causing the development of multiple,
thickened or tumorous membrane (polyps) develop on sometimes hundreds, of polyps. One or more of these
the inner lining of this part of the bowel. The polyps eventually becomes cancerous.
eventually become malignant.
Many individuals develop polyps without display-
ing any symptoms. Others experience such gastrointesti-
Description nal problems as diarrhea, constipation, abdominal
cramps,blood in the stool,or weight loss. FAP patients
Familial polyposis (FP) is known by many syn-
may also develop nonmalignant tumors (desmoid
onyms,most include some combination of words which
tumors),and/or some bone and dental abnormalities. In
reflect what is known about the disease. As the disease is
addition,they may exhibit a “spot”on the retina of the
inherited, the word, family, is often included. Because
eye (congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment
these mushroom-like growths are the most obvious mani-
epithelium,or CHRPE).
festation of the disorder,the word,polyp,is usually in
the term as well. Adenoma refers to the particular kind of Relatives of individuals with diagnosed FAP are at
polyp that is typically discovered. Some of the names high risk of having the disease themselves. There are no
found in medical texts and journals include polyposis other known risk factors for this condition.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1285
Familial
polyposis
Diagnosis tion was administered,driving and resumption of normal
activities are permitted immediately. The cost of the pro-
The abnormal portion of the gene that causes FAP in
cedure varies widely,but,as of 1997,it was covered by
most patients can be detected. A blood test can then be
Medicare, indicating the likelihood of other types of
performed which identifies family members who have the
insurance coverage.
same mutation. They will eventually develop the condi-
tion. Children who have a parent with FAP,and siblings of In some cases the portion of the gene responsible for
affected patients whose parental history is incomplete, FAP cannot be identified. Family members of these
should be evaluated. The polyps characteristic of FAP patients cannot have a predictive blood test. The current
have been found in children as young as age five. Testing recommendation is for these patients to have the same
of appropriate individuals should take place as soon as the annual examination with flexible sigmoidoscopy as
diagnosis of FAP is established in one member of a family. patients with a diagnosed FAP gene. A noninvasive
screening eye examinationto detect CHRPE,associated
Relatives of people with diagnosed FAP should
with FAP,may also be performed.
exercisecaution regarding where they seek advice and
testing. One study of a commercially available blood test
found that less than 20% of patients received any genetic Treatment
counseling,and almost one third of their physicians mis-
The only definitive treatment for FAP is surgical
interpreted the test results.
removal of the lower intestine. Since the goal is to pre-
Registries for FAP patients can be found at many vent cancer,the operation is done as soon as adenoma-
sites in the United States. Such a registry specializes in tous polyps are found on sigmoidoscopy. Waiting until a
identification,assistance,and education of people with a polyp becomes malignant is unsafe, as the cancer may
particular disease,and is usually a separate department in invade surrounding tissues.
a research hospital. A team of health professionals who
There are several choices about the type of surgery to
have expertise in the disorder staff the registry.
treat this condition. Some authorities advocate removal of
Testing within a research setting and/or at a facility the colon, leaving the rectum or lowest portion of the
with a registry of patients with FAP is more likely to intestine in place. The small intestine can be attached to
safeguard against problems,such as the misunderstand- the rectum,allowing normal bowel function. This is often
ing of test results. As part of a research project, some- called ileorectal anastomosis. Others argue that this sec-
times counseling as well as blood tests are available at no tion is also liable to develop polyps, needs to be moni-
charge to the patient. Insurance coverage varies. Con- tored regularly,and may require eventual removal.
cerns about confidentiality, and future insurance and Excision of the entire lower intestine with preserva-
employment discrimination,may prompt individuals to tion of normal bowel function is possible. This entails a
pay for the examination out of pocket. Commercial blood more complex surgical procedure. The patient may expe-
tests cost approximately $250 per sample. rience more complications and a longer recovery period.
However, the risk of polyp development in this area is
If the abnormal gene is found in a family member,
very low. Periodic examination of the intestine may not
annual screening for colon polyps is recommended,
be needed once healing is complete.
beginning at age 11. Flexible sigmoidoscopyis used for
this examination. It is usually done in a physician’s The more intricate surgery may be referred to as a J-
office,or in a hospital department,most often by a gas- pouch procedure, an ileal pouch-anal anastomosis, a
troenterologist or a surgeon. Food intake may be restrict- restorative proctocolectomy,or an ileoanal reservoir proce-
ed for 24 hours prior to the procedure. Before the study, dure. It involves creating a “pouch”of tissue from the small
the intestine is cleared of stool by one or more small ene- intestine,which is attached to the anus. This serves as a
mas. Some physicians prefer to sedate the patient, to reservoir or holding area for stool,much as the rectum does
help them relax. Then a flexible, lighted, hollow tube normally. The surgery is often done in several stages. A
(sigmoidoscope) is inserted into the anus and maneu- temporary ileostomy,which creates an opening of the small
vered into the large intestine. The physician examines the intestines onto the abdomen,is required. When all proce-
wall of the colon to look for polyps. If polyps are found, dures are completed,and after a recuperation period,the
one or more may be removed for biopsy. patient regains normal bowel function through the anus.
Most patients report little discomfort during the Some researchers suggest that as genetic testing
examination. The procedure itself takes five to fifteen becomes more developed, the specific portion of the
minutes. The patient may be at the facility an hour, or gene involved may dictate the type of surgery chosen.
more,if recovery from sedationis needed. If no medica- Those at high risk of developing rectal polypsmay be
1286 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisopylop
lailimaF
advised to have the more complex operation. FAP
patients felt to be at lower risk for rectal polyps might be KEY TERMS
counseled to consider the less radical surgery.
Medical therapy to treat the adenomatous polyps has Gene—The basic unit of heredity, made of DNA.
been attempted. Some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory Each gene occupies certain location on a chromo-
drugs have been effective in reducing the number and some.
size of the polyps. It is possible that these agents will be Mutation—An alteration in a gene, especially one
used as an additional treatment for FAP, but they are capable of producing a new trait, or a change in
unlikely to replace surgery. function.
Individuals with FAP are at increased risk for cancers
of the upper digestive tract including the upper portion of
the small bowel (dudodenum) and the channels where
bile flows (biliary tract). Cancers of the thyroid,pancreas,
and adrenal gland are also more commonly found among Family therapy
FAP patients. Periodic examination for the development
of malignancy in these areas is considered part of the Definition
treatment of FAP. In some cases,such as cancer involving
Family therapy is a form of psychotherapy that
the duodenum, the tests themselves carry a chance of
involves all the members of a nuclear or extended family.
complications. The risk of the study must be weighed
It may be conducted by a pair or team of therapists. In
against the potential benefits of knowing the results. Non-
many cases the team consists of a man and a woman in
malignant growths, called desmoid tumors, also occur
order to treat gender-related issues or serve as role mod-
more frequently in patients with FAP. Although they are
els for family members. Although some forms of family
not malignant, they grow quickly into surrounding tis-
therapy are based on behavioral or psychodynamic prin-
sues,causing many difficulties,even deathin some cases.
ciples,the most widespread form is based on family sys-
tems theory. This approach regards the family, as a
Prognosis
whole,as the unit of treatment,and emphasizes such fac-
tors as relationships and communication patterns rather
The major cause of death in many patients with FAP
than traits or symptoms in individual members.
remains colorectal cancer. One study suggested that even
with improved disease recognition,social and emotional Family therapy is a relatively recent development in
factors,such as fear of surgery,may significantly delay a psychotherapy. It began shortly after World War II,when
patient’s treatment. In recent years,the trend is towards doctors, who were treating schizophrenic patients,
mortality from other causes,such as desmoid tumors or noticed that the patients’families communicated in dis-
cancers other than colorectal. It has been estimated that a turbed ways. The doctors also found that the patients’
patient with known FAP has a relative risk of dying over symptoms rose or fell according to the level of tension
three times greater than that of the average population,at between their parents. These observations led to consid-
a given age. ering a family as an organism or system with its own
internal rules,patterns of functioning,and tendency to
Prevention resist change. The therapists started to treat the families
of schizophrenic patients as whole units rather than
FAP cannot be prevented. Aggressive diagnosis,
focusing on the hospitalized member. They found that in
treatment,and follow-up monitoring are keys to success-
many cases the family member with schizophrenia
ful management of the disease.
improved when the “patient” was the family system.
(This should not be misunderstood to mean that schizo-
Resources
phrenia is caused by family problems,although family
ORGANIZATIONS problems may worsen the condition.) This approach of
Familial Polyposis Registry. Department of Colorectal Surgery. involving the entire family in the treatment plan and ther-
Cleveland Clinic Foundation. 9500 Euclid Ave.,Cleveland apy was then applied to families with problems other
OH 44195-5001. (216) 444-6470. than the presence of schizophrenia.
National Organization for Rare Disorders. PO Box 8923,New
Fairfield,CT 06812-8923. (800) 999-6673. <http://www. Family therapy is becoming an increasingly com-
rarediseases.org>. mon form of treatment as changes in American society
are reflected in family structures. It has led to two further
Ellen S. Weber,MSN developments:couples therapy,which treats relationship
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1287
Family
therapy
problems between marriage partners or gay couples; and Description
the extension of family therapy to religious communities
Family therapy tends to be short-term treatment,usu-
or other groups that resemble families.
ally several months in length,with a focus on resolving
specific problems such as eating disorders, difficulties
Purpose with school,or adjustments to bereavement or geographi-
Family therapy is often recommended in the follow- cal relocation. It is not normally used for long-term or
ing situations: intensive restructuring of severely dysfunctional families.
In family therapy sessions,all members of the family
•Treatment of a family member with schizophrenia or
and both therapists (if there is more than one) are present at
multiple personality disorder(MPD). Family therapy
most sessions. The therapists seek to analyze the process of
helps other family members understand their relative’s
family interaction and communication as a whole; they do
disorder and adjust to the psychological changes that
not take sides with specific members. They may make occa-
may be occurring in the relative.
sional comments or remarks intended to help family mem-
•Families with problems across generational boundaries.
bers become more conscious of patterns or structures that
These would include problems caused by parents shar-
had been previously taken for granted. Family therapists,
ing housing with grandparents,or children being reared
who work as a team,also model new behaviors for the fami-
by grandparents.
ly through their interactions with each other during sessions.
•Families that deviate from social norms (common-law
Family therapy is based on family systems theory,
relationships,gay couples rearing children,etc.). These
which understands the family to be a living organism that
families may not have internal problems but may be
is more than the sum of its individual members. Family
troubled by outsiders’judgmental attitudes.
therapy uses “systems”theory to evaluate family members
•Families with members from a mixture of racial,cultur- in terms of their position or role within the system as a
al,or religious backgrounds. whole. Problems are treated by changing the way the sys-
tem works rather than trying to “fix”a specific member.
•Families who are scapegoating a member or undermin-
Family systems theory is based on several major concepts:
ing the treatment of a member in individual therapy.
•Families where the identified patient’s problems seem The identified patient
inextricably tied to problems with other family members.
The identified patient (IP) is the family member with
•Blended families with adjustment difficulties. the symptom that has brought the family into treatment.
Most family therapists presuppose an average level The concept of the IP is used by family therapists to keep
of intelligence and education on the part of adult mem- the family from scapegoating the IP or using him or her
bers of the family. as a way of avoiding problems in the rest of the system.
Homeostasis (balance)
Precautions
The concept of homeostasis means that the family
Some families are not considered suitable candidates
system seeks to maintain its customary organization and
for family therapy. They include:
functioning over time. It tends to resist change. The fami-
•families in which one, or both, of the parents is psy- ly therapist can use the concept of homeostasis to explain
chotic or has been diagnosed with antisocial or para- why a certain family symptom has surfaced at a given
noid personality disorder, time,why a specific member has become the IP,and what
•families whose cultural or religious values are opposed is likely to happen when the family begins to change.
to,or suspicious of,psychotherapy,
The extended family field
•families with members who cannot participate in treat-
ment sessions because of physical illness or similar The extended family field refers to the nuclear fami-
limitations, ly,plus the network of grandparents and other members
of the extended family. This concept is used to explain
•families with members with very rigid personality
the intergenerational transmission of attitudes,problems,
structures,(here,members might be at risk for an emo-
behaviors,and other issues.
tional or psychological crisis),
•families whose members cannot or will not be able to Differentiation
meet regularly for treatment,
Differentiation refers to the ability of each family
•families that are unstable or on the verge of breakup. member to maintain his or her own sense of self,while
1288 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ypareht
ylimaF
remaining emotionally connected to the family. One
mark of a healthy family is its capacity to allow members KEY TERMS
to differentiate,while family members still feel that they
are “members in good standing”of the family. Blended family—A family formed by the remar-
riage of a divorced or widowed parent. It includes
Triangular relationships
the new husband and wife, plus some or all of
Family systems theory maintains that emotional rela- their children from previous marriages.
tionships in families are usually triangular. Whenever any Differentiation—The ability to retain one’s identi-
two persons in the family system have problems with each ty within a family system while maintaining emo-
other,they will “triangle in”a third member as a way of sta- tional connections with the other members.
bilizing their own relationship. The triangles in a family sys-
Extended family field—A person’s family of origin
tem usually interlock in a way that maintains family home-
plus grandparents, in-laws, and other relatives.
ostasis. Common family triangles include a child and its
Family systems theory—An approach to treatment
parents; two children and one parent; a parent,a child,and a
that emphasizes the interdependency of family
grandparent; three siblings; or,husband,wife,and an in-law.
members rather than focusing on individuals in iso-
lation from the family. This theory underlies the most
Preparation
influential forms of contemporary family therapy.
In some instances the family may have been referred
Genogram—A family tree diagram that represents
to a specialist in family therapy by their pediatrician or
the names, birth order, sex, and relationships of the
other primary care provider. It is estimated that as many as
members of a family. Therapists use genograms to
50% of office visits to pediatricians have to do with devel-
detect recurrent patterns in the family history and
opmental problems in children that are affecting their fam-
to help the members understand their problem(s).
ilies. Some family doctors use symptom checklists or psy-
Homeostasis—The tendency of a family system to
chological screeners to assess a family’s need for therapy.
maintain internal stability and resist change.
Family therapists may be either psychiatrists,clinical
Identified patient (IP)—The family member in
psychologists,or other professionals certified by a spe-
whom the family’s symptom has emerged or is
cialty board in marriage and family therapy. They will
most obvious.
usually evaluate a family for treatment by scheduling a
Nuclear family—The basic family unit, consisting
series of interviews with the members of the immediate
of father, mother, and their biological children.
family, including young children, and significant or
symptomatic members of the extended family. This Triangling—A process in which two family mem-
process allows the therapist(s) to find out how each mem- bers lower the tension level between them by
ber of the family sees the problem,as well as to form first drawing in a third member.
impressions of the family’s functioning. Family therapists
typically look for the level and types of emotions
expressed, patterns of dominance and submission, the
roles played by family members,communication styles, couple relationships that had been fragile before the
and the locations of emotional triangles. They will also beginning of therapy. Intensive family therapy may also
note whether these patterns are rigid or relatively flexible. be difficult for psychotic family members.
Preparation also usually includes drawing a geno-
gram,which is a diagram that depicts significant persons Normal results
and events in the family’s history. Genograms also Normal results vary,but in good circumstances,they
include annotations about the medical history and major include greater insight,increased differentiation of indi-
personality traits of each member. Genograms help in vidual family members,improved communication within
uncovering intergenerational patterns of behavior,mar- the family,loosening of previously automatic behavior
riage choices, family alliances and conflicts, the exis- patterns,and resolution of the problem that led the fami-
tence of family secrets,and other information that sheds ly to seek treatment.
light on the family’s present situation.
Resources
Risks
BOOKS
The chief risk in family therapy is the possible Clark,R. Barkley. “Psychosocial Aspects of Pediatrics & Psy-
unsettling of rigid personality defenses in individuals,or chiatric Disorders:Psychosocial Assessment of Children
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1289
Family
therapy
& Families.”In Current Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment, syndrome,and Lignac-de Toni-Debré-Fanconi syndrome.
ed. William W. Hay Jr.,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Fanconi’s anemia is,however,a totally different disease.
Lange,1997.
Friedman,Edwin H. Generation to Generation:Family
Process in Church and Synagogue.New York:The Guil- Causes and symptoms
ford Press,1985.
Causes
Glick,Robert Alan,and Henry I. Spitz. “Common Approaches
to Psychotherapy:Family Therapy.”In The Columbia Fanconi’s syndrome can be caused by a variety of
University College of Physicians and Surgeons Complete genetic defects and by certain environmental assaults.
Home Guide to Mental Health,ed. Frederic I. Kass,et al.
The genetic diseases known to give rise to Fan-
New York:Henry Holt and Co.,1992.
coni’s syndrome are cystinosis (the most common cause
Meissner,W. W. “The Psychotherapies:Individual,Family,and
Group.”In The New Harvard Guide to Psychiatry,ed. in children),galactosemia,glycogen storage disease,
Armand M. Nicholi Jr. Cambridge,MA:The Belknap hereditary fructose intolerance, Lowe syndrome,
Press of Harvard University Press,1988. Wilson disease,tyrosinemia,medullary cystic disease,
Napier,Augustus Y. The Family Crucible.New York:Harper & vitamin D dependency, and familial idiopathic Fan-
Row Publishers,1988. coni’s syndrome.
Environmental assaults that cause Fanconi’s syn-
Rebecca J. Frey
drome include exposure to heavy metals (like cadmium,
lead, mercury, platinum, uranium), certain drugs (like
Famine fever see Relapsing fever
outdated tetracycline and gentamicin),other substances
(like Lysol, paraquat, toluene, the amino acid lysine
taken as a nutritional supplement), and kidney trans-
plantation.
Symptoms
Fanconi’s syndrome
Fanconi’s syndrome symptoms related directly to
Definition impaired absorption include excessive urine production
and urination; excessive thirst; dehydration; constipa-
Fanconi’s syndrome is a set of kidney malfunctions
tion; anorexia nervosa; vomiting; elevated levels of glu-
brought about by a variety of seemingly unrelated disor-
cose, phosphate, calcium, uric acid, amino acids, and
ders. Kidney malfunction leads to excessive urine produc-
protein (especially beta-microglobulin and lysozyme) in
tion and excessive thirst,resulting in deficits of water,cal- 2
the urine; elevated levels of chloride and decreased levels
cium,potassium,magnesium,and other substances in the
of phosphate and calcium in the blood; and excessively
body. It often leads to bone disease and stunted growth.
acidic blood.
The most noticeable indirect consequences of
Description
impaired reabsorption are the bone diseases,rickets and
Normally, kidneys cleanse the blood and keep its osteomalacia. Rickets affects children and is associated
salt,water,and acidity in balance,leaving what the body with bone deformities, failure to grow, and difficulty
needs in the blood and putting what the body doesn’t walking. If a person acquires Fanconi’s syndrome as an
need into the urine,which leaves the body. This task is adult, the bone disease is termed osteomalacia and is
performed in two steps. First, the blood is filtered accompanied by severe bone painand spontaneous frac-
through a kidney structure with small holes that keep the tures. Unlike rickets due to malnutrition,these diseases
cells and large molecules in the blood. Second,some of cannot be reversed with vitamin D. Muscle weakness and
the small molecules in the filtrate,needed by the body, occasional paralysisare other indirect consequences of
are reabsorbed and returned to the bloodstream. the ineffective reabsorption.
This reabsorption step is defective in Fanconi’s syn-
drome. As a consequence,substances that are normally Diagnosis
reabsorbed, like glucose, amino acids, small proteins,
Diagnosis of Fanconi’s syndrome can be made by
water,calcium,potassium,magnesium,bicarbonate,and
urine and blood tests. It is also important to find the
phosphate,are lost and the body becomes overly acidic.
underlying cause to decide on the best treatment. Other
Fanconi’s syndrome is also known as Fanconi syn- symptoms specific to a particular patient will point to
drome, renal Fanconi syndrome, Fanconi renaltubular other useful diagnostic tests. For example,high levels of
1290 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
s’inocnaF
blood galactose in conjunction with symptoms of Fan-
coni’s syndrome indicate the patient is suffering from KEY TERMS
galactosemia,while high blood levels of cadmium indi-
cate the patient is suffering from cadmium poisoning. Acidosis—Condition where the body is more
acidic than normal; associated with headache,
Treatment nausea, vomiting, and visual disturbances.
Fanconi’s syndrome is best treated by attacking the Fanconi’s anemia—An inherited form of aplastic
underlying cause whenever possible. For example,when anemia.
cystinosis is treated with the drug cysteamine to lower
Filtrate—The part of filtered material that flows
cystine levels in the body or Wilson disease is treated
through the filter.
with penicillamine to lower the levels of copper,accom-
Idiopathic—Refers to a disease of unknown cause.
panying symptoms of Fanconi’s syndrome will subside.
If the patient has acquired the disease from a heavy metal Polydipsia—Excessive thirst.
or another toxic agent, all contact with the toxic agent
Polyuria—Excessive production of urine.
should stop; the condition will then likely disappear.
Nevertheless,additional treatment will be necessary
either when it’s not possible to treat the underlying cause
or while waiting for the kidneys to resume normal func- ORGANIZATIONS
tion. This is done by restricting sodium chloride (table The American Society of Nephrology. 2025 M Street NW
salt),giving antacidsto counteract the excessive acidity #800,Washington,DC 20036. (202) 367-1190. <http://
www.asn-online.com>.
of the blood,and supplying potassium supplements.
National Kidney Foundation. 30 East 33rd St.,New York,NY
Kidney transplant is the treatment of last resort,used 10016. (800) 622-9010. <http://www.kidney.org>.
for patients whose kidneys have failed.
OTHER
“Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.”OMIM Homepage.
Prognosis
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim>.
Fanconi’s syndrome can be reversible. Fanconi’s
Lorraine Lica,PhD
syndrome caused by kidney transplantation usually
reverses itself within the first year after transplant
Farsightedness see Hyperopia
surgery. When caused by a toxin in the environment,
Fanconi’s syndrome generally can be reversed by remov- FAS see Fetal alcohol syndrome
ing the causative agent from the patient’s environment. If
it is caused by a genetic disease, it can usually be
reversed by treating the disease. However,if Fanconi’s
syndrome is not treated or if treatment is unsuccessful,
the kidneys can fail.
Fasciotomy
Definition
Prevention
Fasciotomy is a surgical procedure that cuts away
Fanconi’s syndrome caused secondarily by the
the fascia to relieve tension or pressure
genetic diseases galactosemia,glycogen storage disease,
hereditary fructose intolerance,and tyrosinemia is pre-
vented by appropriate dietary restrictions to treat the Purpose
genetic disease,starting in infancy. The fascia is thin connective tissue covering,or sep-
Fanconi’s syndrome caused by heavy metals and other arating,the muscles and internal organs of the body. It
toxins can be prevented by avoiding these substances. varies in thickness,density,elasticity,and composition,
and is different from ligaments and tendons.
Resources The fascia can be injured either through constant
strain or through trauma. Fasciitis is an inflammation of
BOOKS
the fascia. The most common condition for which fas-
Bergeron,Michael,André Gougoux,and Patrick Vinay. “The
ciotomy is performed is plantar fasciitis,an inflamma-
Renal Fanconi Syndrome.”In The Metabolic and Molecu-
lar Bases of Inherited Disease.7th ed. Ed. Charles R. tion of the fascia on the bottom of the foot that is some-
Scriver,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,Inc.,1995. times called a heel spur or stone bruise.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1291
Fasciotomy
Plantar fasciitis is caused by long periods on the
feet, being overweight, and wearing shoes that do not KEY TERMS
support the foot well. Teachers, mail carriers, runners,
and others who make heavy use of their feet are especial- Endoscope—A tube that contains a tiny camera and
ly likely to suffer from plantar fasciitis. light, that is inserted in the body to allow a doctor
Plantar fasciitis results in moderate to disabling heel to see inside without making a large incision.
pain. If nine to twelve months of conservative treatment
(reducing time on feet, non-steroid anti-inflammatory
drugs,arch supports) under the supervision of a doctor
does not result in pain relief,a fasciotomy may be done. Aftercare
Fasciotomy removes a small portion of the fascia to
Aftercare depends on the reason for the fasciotomy.
relieve tension and pain. Connective tissue grows back
People who have endoscopic plantar fasciotomy can
into the cut space left by the cut,effectively lengthening
walk without pain almost immediately,return to wearing
the fascia.
their regular shoes within three to five days,and return to
When a fasciotomy is performed on other parts of normal activities within three weeks. Most will need to
the body, it is usually done to relieve pressure from a wear arch supports in their shoes.
compression injury to a limb. This type of injury often
occurs during contact sports. The blood vessels of the
Risks
limb are damaged. They swell and leak, causing
In endoscopic plantar fasciotomy,the greatest risk is
inflammation. Fluid builds up in the area contained by
that the arch will drop slightly as a result of this surgery,
the fascia. A fasciotomy is done to relieve this pres-
causing other foot problems. Risks involved with other
sure and prevent tissue death. Similar injury occurs in
types of fasciotomy are those associated with the admin-
high voltage electrical burns where deep tissue dam-
istration of anesthesia and the development of blood clots.
age occurs.
Normal results
Precautions
Fasciotomy in the limbs reduces pressure, thus
In the case of injury,fasciotomy is done on an emer-
reducing tissue death. Endoscopic plantar fasciotomy has
gency basis, and the outcome of the surgery depends
a success rate of 90–95%.
largely on the general health of the patient. Plantar fas-
ciotomies are appropriate for most people whose foot
problems cannot be resolved in any other way. Resources
BOOKS
Description “Blast Injuries.”In Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment.
10th ed. Ed. Lawrence W. Way. Stamford:Appleton &
Fasciotomy in the limbs is usually done by a surgeon
Lange,1994.
under general or regional anesthesia. An incision is made
in the skin,and a small area of fascia is removed where it OTHER
will best relieve pressure. Then the incision is closed. “New Treatments for Heel Spur Syndrome.”<http://www.
footspecialist.com/heelspur.html>.
Plantar fasciotomy is an endoscopic (performed with
“Plantar Fasciitis.”Heelspurs.com.9 Apr. 1998 <http://www.
the use of an endoscope) procedure. It is done by a foot heelspurs.com>.
specialist in a doctor’s office or outpatient surgical clinic
Tish Davidson
under local anesthesia and takes 20 minutes to one hour.
The doctor makes two small incisions on either side of
the heel. An endoscope is inserted in one to guide the
doctor in where to cut. A tiny knife is inserted in the
other. A portion of the fascia is cut from near the heel;
Fasting
then the incisions are closed.
Definition
Preparation
Fasting is voluntarily not eating food for varying
Little preparation is done before a fasciotomy. When lengths of time. Fasting is used as a medical therapy for
the fasciotomy is related to burn injuries,the fluid and many conditions. It is also a spiritual practice in many
electrolyte status of the patient are constantly monitored. religions.
1292 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gnitsaF
Purpose restore itself,and burning stored calories gets rid of toxic
substances stored in the body.
Fasting can be used for nearly every chronic condi-
tion, including allergies, anxiety, arthritis, asthma, The digestive tract is the part of the body most
depression,diabetes,headaches,heart disease,high cho- exposed to environmental threats, including bacteria,
lesterol,low blood sugar,digestive disorders,mental ill- viruses, parasites, and toxins. It requires the most
ness,and obesity. Fasting is an effective and safe weight immune system support. When food is broken down in
loss method. It is frequently prescribed as a detoxifica- the intestines,it travels through the blood to the liver,the
tion treatment for those with conditions that may be largest organ of the body’s natural detoxification system.
influenced by environmental factors,such as cancerand The liver breaks down and removes the toxic by-products
multiple chemical sensitivity. Fasting has been used produced by digestion, including natural ones and the
successfully to help treat people who have been exposed chemicals now present in the food supply. During fast-
to high levels of toxic materials due to accident or occu- ing,the liver and immune system are essentially freed to
pation. Fasting is thought to be beneficial as a preventa- detoxify and heal other parts of the body.
tive measure to increase overall health,vitality,and resis- Many healers claim that fasting is a particularly use-
tance to disease. Fasting is also used as a method of men- ful therapy for Americans and for the modern lifestyle,
tal and spiritual rejuvenation. subjected to heavy diets,overeating,and constant expo-
sure to food additives and chemicals. Some alternative
Description practitioners have gone so far as to estimate that the aver-
age American is carrying 5-10 pounds of toxic sub-
Origins
stances in their bodies,for which fasting is the quickest
Used for thousands of years, fasting is one of the and most effective means of removal.
oldest therapies in medicine. Many of the great doctors
of ancient times and many of the oldest healing systems Physiology of fasting
have recommended it as an integral method of healing
Through evolution,the body became very efficient
and prevention. Hippocrates,the father of Western medi-
at storing energy and handling situations when no food
cine, believed fasting enabled the body to heal itself.
was available. For many centuries,fasting was probably
Paracelsus,another great healer in the Western tradition,
a normal occurrence for most people, and the body
wrote 500 years ago that “fasting is the greatest remedy,
adapted to it. It is estimated that even very thin people
the physician within.”Ayurvedic medicine,the world’s
can survive for 40 days or more without food. The body
oldest healing system, has long advocated fasting as a
has a special mechanism that is initiated when no food is
major treatment.
eaten. Fasting is not starvation, but rather the body’s
Fasting has also been used in nearly every religion in
burning of stored energy. Starvation occurs when the
the world, including Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism,
body no longer has any stored energy and begins using
and Islam. Many of history’s great spiritual leaders fasted
essential tissues such as organs for an energy source.
for mental and spiritual clarity,including Jesus,Buddha,
Therapeutic fasts are stopped long before this happens.
and Mohammed. In one of the famous political acts of
Many physiological changes occur in the body dur-
the last century,the Indian leader Mahatma Gandhi fast-
ing fasting. During the first day or so,the body uses its
ed for 21 days to promote peace.
glycogen reserves,the sugars that are the basic energy
Fasting has been used in Europe as a medical treat-
supply. After these are depleted,the body begins using
ment for years. Many spas and treatment centers,particu-
fat. However, the brain, which has high fuel require-
larly those in Germany,Sweden,and Russia,use med-
ments,still needs glucose (sugars converted from glyco-
ically supervised fasting. Fasting has gained popularity
gen). To obtain glucose for the brain,the body begins to
in American alternative medicine over the past several
break down muscle tissue during the second day of the
decades,and many doctors feel it is beneficial. Fasting is
fast. Thus,during fasting some muscle loss will occur. To
a central therapy in detoxification, a healing method
fuel the brain,the body would need to burn over a pound
founded on the principle that the build up of toxic sub-
of muscle a day,but the body has developed another way
stances in the body is responsible for many illnesses and
to create energy that saves important muscle mass. This
conditions.
protein-sparing process is called ketosis,which occurs
The principle of fasting is simple. When the intake during the third day of a fast for men and the second day
of food is temporarily stopped, many systems of the for women. In this highly efficient state,the liver begins
body are given a break from the hard work of digestion. converting stored fat and other nonessential tissues into
The extra energy gives the body the chance to heal and ketones, which can be used by the brain, muscles, and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1293
Fasting
heart as energy. It is at this point in the fast that sensa- days. First,heavy foods such as meats and dairy products
tions of hunger generally go away, and many people should be eliminated for a day or two. Grains,nuts,and
experience normal or even increased energy levels. Hor- beans should then be reduced for several days. The day
mone levels and certain functions become more stable in before a fast,only easily digested foods like fruits,light
this state as well. The goal of most fasts is to allow the salads,and soups should be eaten. During the fast,only
body to reach the ketosis state in order to burn excess fat pure water and occasional herbal teas should be drunk.
and unneeded or damaged tissue. Thus,fasts longer than
Fasts should be ended as gradually as they are
three days are generally recommended as therapy.
entered,going from lighter to heavier foods progressive-
Weight loss occurs most rapidly during the first few ly. The diet after a fast should emphasize fresh,whole-
days of a fast,up to 2 pounds per day. In following days, some foods. Fasters should particularly take care not to
the figure drops to around 0.5 pound per day. An average overeat when they complete a fast.
weight loss of a pound a day for an entire fast can be
expected.
Precautions
Fasting isn’t appropriate for everyone and,in some
Performing a fast
cases,could be harmful. Any person undertaking a first
Fasts can be performed for varying lengths of time, fast longer than three days should seek medical supervi-
depending on the person and his or her health require- sion. Those with health conditions should always have
ments. For chronic conditions, therapists recommend medical support during fasting. Plenty of water should be
from two to four weeks to get the most benefits. Seven- taken by fasters since dehydrationcan occur. Saunas and
day fasts are also commonly performed. A popular fast- sweating therapies are sometimes recommended to assist
ing program for prevention and general health is a three- detoxification,but should be used sparingly. Those fasting
day fast taken four times per year,at the change of each should significantly slow down their lifestyles. Taking
season. These can be easily performed over long week- time off of work is helpful,or at least reducing the work
ends. Preventative fasts of one day per week are used by load. Fasters should also get plenty of rest. Exercise
many people as well. should be kept light,such as walking and gentle stretching.
Juice fasts are also used by many people,although
these are not technically fasts. Juice fasts are less inten- Side effects
sive than water fasts because the body doesn’t reach the
Those fasting may experience side effects of
ketosis stage. The advantage of juice fasts is that fruit and
fatigue, malaise, aches and pains, emotional duress,
vegetable drinks can supply extra energy and nutrients.
acne, headaches, allergies, swelling, vomiting, bad
People can fit a few days of juice fasting into their normal
breath,and symptoms of colds and flu. These reactions
schedules without significant drops in energy. Juice fasts
are sometimes called healing crises,which are caused by
are also said to have cleansing and detoxifying effects.
temporarily increased levels of toxins in the body due to
The disadvantage of juice fasts is that the body never gets
elimination and cleansing. Lower energy levels should be
to the ketosis stage,so these fasters are thought to lack the
expected during a fast.
deep detoxification and healing effects of the water fast.
Medical supervision is recommended for any fast
Research and general acceptance
over three days. Most alternative medicine practitioners,
such as homeopaths,naturopathic doctors,and ayurvedic The physiology of fasting has been widely studied
doctors,can supervise and monitor patients during fasts. and documented by medical science. Beneficial effects
Those performing extended fasts and those with health such as lowered cholesterol and improved general func-
conditions may require blood,urine,and other tests dur- tioning have been shown. Fasting as a treatment for ill-
ing fasting. There are many alternative health clinics that ness and disease has been studied less, although some
perform medically supervised fasts as well. Some con- studies around the world have shown beneficial results. A
ventional medical doctors may also supervise patients 1984 study showed that workers in Taiwan who had
during fasts. Costs and insurance coverage vary,depend- severe chemical poisoning had dramatic improvement
ing on the doctor,clinic,and requirements of the patient. after a ten-day fast. In Russia and Japan, studies have
demonstrated fasting to be an effective treatment for men-
tal illness. Fasting has been featured on the cover of med-
Preparations
ical journals,although mainstream medicine has general-
Fasts must be entered and exited with care. To enter ly ignored fasting and detoxification treatments as valid
a fast,the diet should be gradually lightened over a few medical procedures.
1294 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gnitsaF
exhaustion that goes beyond normal sleepiness,it is usu-
KEY TERMS ally a sign that something more serious is amiss.
Physically, fatigue is characterized by a profound
Ayurvedic medicine—A traditional healing system lack of energy,feelings of muscle weakness,and slowed
developed in India. movements or central nervous system reactions. Fatigue
Toxin—A substance that has poisonous effects on can also trigger serious mental exhaustion. Persistent
the body. fatigue can cause a lack of mental clarity (or feeling of
mental “fuzziness”), difficulty concentrating, and in
some cases,memory loss.
The majority of research that exists on fasting is tes- Causes and symptoms
timonial,consisting of individual personal accounts of
healing without statistics or controlled scientific experi- Fatigue may be the result of one or more environ-
ments. In the alternative medical community,fasting is mental causes such as inadequate rest, improper diet,
an essential and widely accepted treatment for many ill- work and home stressors,or poor physical conditioning,
nesses and chronic conditions. or one symptom of a chronic medical condition or dis-
ease process in the body. Heart disease,low blood pres-
sure,diabetes,end-stage renal disease,iron-deficiency
Resources
anemia, narcolepsy, and cancer can cause long-term,
BOOKS ongoing fatigue symptoms. Acute illnesses such as viral
Cott,Alan. Fasting:The Ultimate Diet.Chicago:Hastings and bacterial infections can also trigger temporary feel-
House,1997. ings of exhaustion. In addition,mental disorders such as
Fuhrman,Joel,M.D. Fasting and Eating for Health.New York: depression can also cause fatigue.
St. Martin’s,1995.
Page,Linda,N.D. Healthy Healing.CA:Healthy Healing Pub-
A number of medications,including antihistamines,
lications,1998. antibiotics,and blood pressure medications,may cause
drowsiness as a side-effect. Individuals already suffering
ORGANIZATIONS from fatigue who are prescribed one of these medications
Fasting Center International. 32 West Anapurna St.,#360,
may wish to check with their healthcare provider about
Santa Barbara,CA 93101. <http://www.fasting.com>.
alternative treatments.
Douglas Dupler Extreme fatigue which persists,unabated,for at least
six months,is not the result of a diagnosed disease or ill-
Fasting blood sugar test see Blood sugar ness,and is characterized by flu-like symptoms such as
tests
swollen lymph nodes,sore throat,and muscle weakness
and/or painmay indicate a diagnosis of chronic fatigue
Fasting plasma glucose test see Blood sugar syndrome. Chronic fatigue syndrome (sometimes called
tests chronic fatigue immune deficiency syndrome),is a debil-
itating illness that causes overwhelming exhaustion and a
constellation of neurological and immunological symp-
toms. Between 1.5 and 2 million Americans are estimat-
ed to suffer from the disorder.
Fatigue
Diagnosis
Definition
Because fatigue is a symptom of a number of differ-
Fatigue is physical and/or mental exhaustion that ent disorders,diseases,and lifestyle choices,diagnosis
can be triggered by stress, medication, overwork, or may be difficult. A thorough examination and patient his-
mental and physical illness or disease. tory by a qualified healthcare provider is the first step in
determining the cause of the fatigue. A physician can
rule out physical conditions and diseases that feature
Description
fatigue as a symptom,and can also determine if prescrip-
Everyone experiences fatigue occasionally. It is the tion drugs, poor dietary habits, work environment, or
body’s way of signaling its need for rest and sleep. But other external stressors could be triggering the exhaus-
when fatigue becomes a persistent feeling of tiredness or tion. Several diagnostic tests may also be required to rule
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1295
Fatigue
out common physical causes of exhaustion, such as •Eat iron-rich foods (i.e., liver, raisins, spinach, apri-
blood tests to check for iron-deficiency anemia. cots). Iron enables the blood to transport oxygen
throughout the tissues,organs,and muscles,and dimin-
Diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome is signifi-
ished oxygenation of the blood can result in fatigue.
cantly more difficult. Because there is no specific biolog-
ical marker or conclusive blood test to check for the dis- •Avoid high-fat meals and snacks. High fat foods take
order,healthcare providers must rely on the patient’s pre- longer to digest,reducing blood flow to the brain,heart,
sentation and severity of symptoms to make a diagnosis. and rest of the body while blood flow is increased to the
In many cases, individuals with chronic fatigue syn- stomach.
drome go through a battery of invasive diagnostic tests
•Eat unrefined carbohydrates and proteins together for
and several years of consultation with medical profes-
sustained energy.
sionals before receiving a correct diagnosis.
•Balance proteins. Limiting protein to 15–20 grams per
meal and two snacks of 15 grams is recommended,but
Treatment not getting enough protein adds to fatigue. Pregnant or
breastfeeding women should get more protein.
Conventional medicine recommends the dietary and
lifestyle changes outlined above as a first line of defense •Get the recommended daily allowance of B complex
against fatigue. Individuals who experience occasional vitamins(specifically,pantothenic acid,folic acid,thi-
fatigue symptoms may benefit from short term use of amine,and vitamin B ). Deficiencies in these vitamins
12
caffeine-containing central nervous stimulants, which can trigger fatigue.
make people more alert,less drowsy,and improve coor-
•Get the recommended daily allowance of selenium,
dination. However, these should be prescribed with
riboflavin,and niacin. These are all essential nutritional
extreme caution,as overuse of the drug can lead to seri-
elements in metabolizing food energy.
ous sleep disorders,like insomnia.
•Control portions. Individuals should only eat when
Another reason to avoid extended use of caffeineis
they’re hungry, and stop when they’re full. An over-
its associated withdrawal symptoms. People who use
stuffed stomach can cause short-term fatigue,and indi-
large amounts of caffeine over long periods build up a
viduals who are overweight are much more likely to
tolerance to it. When that happens,they have to use more
regularly experience fatigue symptoms.
and more caffeine to get the same effects. Heavy caffeine
use can also lead to dependence. If an individual stops
Lifestyle changes
using caffeine abruptly, withdrawal symptoms may
occur,including headache,fatigue,drowsiness,yawn- Lifestyle factors such as a high-stress job,erratic work
ing, irritability, restlessness, vomiting, or runny nose. hours,lack of social or family support,or erratic sleep pat-
These symptoms can go on for as long as a week. terns can all cause prolonged fatigue. If stress is an issue,a
number of relaxation therapies and techniques are available
to help alleviate tension, including massage, yoga, aro-
Alternative treatment
matherapy,hydrotherapy,progressive relaxation exercis-
The treatment of fatigue depends on its direct cause, es, meditation, and guided imagery. Some individuals
but there are several commonly prescribed treatments for may also benefit from individual or family counseling or
non-specific fatigue, including dietary and lifestyle psychotherapy sessions to work through stress-related
changes, the use of essential oils and herbal therapies, fatigue that is a result of family or social issues.
deep breathing exercises,traditional Chinese medicine,
Maintaining healthy sleep patterns is critical to prop-
and color therapy.
er rest. Having a set “bedtime” helps to keep sleep on
schedule. A calm and restful sleeping environment is also
Dietary changes important to healthy sleep. Above all,the bedroom should
be quiet and comfortable,away from loud noises and with
Inadequate or inappropriate nutritional intake can
adequate window treatments to keep sunlight and street-
cause fatigue symptoms. To maintain an adequate energy
lights out. Removing distractions from the bedroom such
supply and promote overall physical well-being,individ-
as televisions and telephones can also be helpful.
uals should eat a balanced diet and observe the following
nutritional guidelines:
Essential oils
•Drink plenty of water. Individuals should try to drink 9
to 12 glasses of water a day. Dehydrationcan reduce Aromatherapists,hydrotherapists,and other holistic
blood volume,which leads to feelings of fatigue. healthcare providers may recommend the use of essential
1296 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
eugitaF
oils of rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis), eucalyptus
blue gum (Eucalyptus globulus),peppermint,(Mentha x KEY TERMS
piperata),or scots pine oil (Pinus sylvestris) to stimulate
the nervous system and reduce fatigue. These oils can be Aromatherapy—The therapeutic use of plant-
added to bathwater or massage oil as a topical applica- derived, aromatic essential oils to promote physi-
tion. Citrus oils such as lemon,orange,grapefruit,and cal and psychological well-being.
lime have a similar effect,and can be added to a steam
Guided imagery—The use of relaxation and men-
bath or vaporizer for inhalation.
tal visualization to improve mood and/or physical
well-being.
Herbal remedies
Hydrotherapy—Hydrotherapy, or water therapy, is
Herbal remedies that act as circulatory stimulants use of water (hot, cold, steam, or ice) to relieve
can offset the symptoms of fatigue in some individuals. discomfort and promote physical well-being.
An herbalist may recommend an infusion of ginger (Zin-
giber officinale) root or treatment with cayenne (Cap-
sicum annuum), balmony (Chelone glabra), damiana
(Turnera diffusa),ginseng (Panax ginseng),or rosemary Deep breathing exercises
(Rosmarinus officinalis) to treat ongoing fatigue.
Individuals under stress often experience fast,shal-
An infusion is prepared by mixing the herb with low breathing. This type of breathing, known as chest
boiling water,steeping it for several minutes,and then breathing, can lead to shortness of breath, increased
removing the herb from the infusion before drinking. A muscle tension, inadequate oxygenation of blood, and
strainer,tea ball,or infuser can be used to immerse loose fatigue. Breathing exercises can both improve respiratory
herb in the boiling water before steeping and separating function and relieve stress and fatigue.
it. A second method of infusion is to mix the loose herbal
Deep breathing exercises are best performed while
preparation with cold water first,bringing the mixture to
laying flat on the back on a hard surface,usually the floor.
a boil in a pan or teapot,and then separating the tea from
The knees are bent,and the body (particularly the mouth,
the infusion with a strainer before drinking.
nose,and face) is relaxed. One hand should be placed on
Caffeine-containing central nervous system stimu- the chest and one on the abdomen to monitor breathing
lantssuch as tea (Camellia senensis) and cola (Cola niti- technique. With proper breathing techniques,the abdomen
da) can provide temporary,short-term relief of fatigue will rise further than the chest. The individual takes a series
symptoms. However,long-term use of caffeine can cause of long,deep breaths through the nose,attempting to raise
restlessness,irritability,and other unwanted side effects, the abdomen instead of the chest. Air is exhaled through
and in some cases may actually work to increase fatigue the relaxed mouth. Deep breathing can be continued for up
after the stimulating effects of the caffeine wear off. To to 20 minutes. After the exerciseis complete,the individual
avoid these problems,caffeine intake should be limited checks again for body tension and relaxation. Once deep
to 300 mg or less a day (the equivalent of 4-8 cups of breathing techniques have been mastered,an individual can
brewed,hot tea). use deep breathing at any time or place as a quick method
of relieving tension and preventing fatigue.
Traditional Chinese medicine
Color therapy
Chinese medicine regards fatigue as a blockage or
Color therapy, also known as chromatherapy, is
misalignment of qi, or energy flow, inside the human
based on the premise that certain colors are infused with
body. The practitioner of Chinese medicine chooses
healing energies. The therapy uses the seven colors of the
acupuncture and/or herbal therapy to rebalance the
rainbow to promote balance and healing in the mind and
entire system. The Chinese formula Minot Bupleurum
body. Red promotes energy,empowerment,and stimula-
soup (or Xiao Chia Hu Tang) has been used for nearly
tion. Physically,it is thought to improve circulation and
2,000 years for the type of chronic fatigue that comes
stimulate red blood cell production. Red is associated
after the flu. In this condition,the person has low-grade
with the seventh chakra, located at the root; or base of
fever,nausea,and fatigue. There are other formulas that
spine. In yoga,the chakras are specific spiritual energy
are helpful in other cases. Acupuncture involves the
centers of the body.
placement of a series of thin needles into the skin at tar-
geted locations on the body known as acupoints in order Therapeutic color can be administered in a number
to harmonize the energy flow within the human body. of ways. Practitioners of Ayurvedic,or traditional Indian
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1297
Fatigue
medicine,wrap their patients in colored cloth chosen for Lawless,Julia. The Complete Illustrated Guide to Aromathera-
its therapeutic hue. Individuals suffering from fatigue py.Boston:Element Books,1997.
would be wrapped in reds and oranges chosen for their Medical Economics Corporation. The PDR for Herbal Medi-
uplifting and energizing properties. Patients may also be cines.Montvale,NJ:Medical Economics Corporation,
1998.
bathed in light from a color filtered light source to
enhance the healing effects of the treatment. Paula Ford-Martin
Individuals may also be treated with color-infused
water. This is achieved by placing translucent red colored
paper or colored plastic wrap over and around a glass of
water and placing the glass in direct sunlight so the water
can soak up the healing properties and vibrations of the Fatty liver
color. Environmental color sources may also be used to
Definition
promote feelings of stimulation and energy. Red wall and
window treatments,furniture,clothing,and even food may Fatty liver is the collection of excessive amounts of
be recommended for their energizing healing properties. triglycerides and other fats inside liver cells.
Color therapy can be used in conjunction with both
hydrotherapy and aromatherapy to heighten the thera- Description
peutic effect. Spas and holistic healthcare providers may
Also called steatosis,fatty liver can be a temporary or
recommend red color baths or soaks,which combine the
long-term condition,which is not harmful itself,but may
benefits of a warm or hot water soak with energizing
indicate some other type of problem. Left untreated,it can
essential oils and the fatigue-fighting effects of bright red
contribute to other illnesses. It is usually reversible once
hues used in color therapy.
the cause of the problem is diagnosed and corrected. The
liver is the organ responsible for changing fats eaten in
Prognosis the diet to types of fat that can be stored and used by the
body. Triglycerides are one of the forms of fat stored by
Fatigue related to a chronic disease or condition may
the body and used for energy and new cell formation. The
last indefinitely,but can be alleviated to a degree through
break down of fats in the liver can be disrupted by alco-
some of the treatment options outlined here. Exhaustion
holism,malnutrition,pregnancy,or poisoning. In fatty
that can be linked to environmental stressors is usually eas-
liver,large droplets of fat,containing mostly triglycerides,
ily alleviated when those stressors are dealt with properly.
collect within cells of the liver. The condition is generally
There is no known cure for chronic fatigue syn-
not painful and may go unnoticed for a long period of
drome, but steps can be taken to lessen symptoms and
time. In severe cases,the liver can increase to over three
improve quality of life for these individuals while
times its normal size and may be painful and tender.
researchers continue to seek a cure.
Causes and symptoms
Prevention
The most common cause of fatty liver in the United
Many of the treatments outlined above are also rec-
States is alcoholism. In alcoholic fatty liver, over con-
ommended to prevent the onset of fatigue. Getting ade-
sumption of alcohol changes the way that the liver breaks
quate rest and maintaining a consistent bedtime schedule
down and stores fats. Often, people with chronic alco-
are the most effective ways to combat fatigue. A bal-
holism also suffer from malnutrition by eating irregularly
anced diet and moderate exercise program are also
and not consuming a balanced diet. Conditions that can
important to maintaining a consistent energy level.
also cause fatty liver are other forms of malnutrition
(especially when there is not enough protein in the diet),
Resources
obesity, diabetes mellitus, and Reye’s syndrome in
BOOKS children. Pregnancy can cause a rare,but serious form of
Davis,Martha et al. The Relaxation & Stress Reduction Work- fatty liver that starts late in pregnancy and may be associ-
book.4th ed. Oakland,CA:New Harbinger Publications, ated with jaundiceand liver failure. Some drug overdos-
Inc.,1995. es or toxic chemical poisonings, such as carbon tetra-
Hoffman,David. The Complete Illustrated Herbal.New York: chloride,can also cause fatty liver.
Barnes & Noble Books,1999.
Often,there are no symptoms associated with fatty
Johnson,Hillary. Osler’s Web:Inside the Labyrinth of the
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Epidemic.New York:Crown liver. If there are symptoms,they can include painunder
Publishers,1996. the rib cage on the right side of the body,swelling of the
1298 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
revil
yttaF
abdomen,jaundice,and fever. Symptoms that occur less
often in alcoholic fatty liver,but more often in pregnancy KEY TERMS
related fatty liver,are nausea,vomiting,loss of appetite,
and abdominal pain. Jaundice—A condition where the skin and whites
of the eyes take on a yellowish color due to an
increase of bilirubin (a compound produced by
Diagnosis
the liver) in the blood.
During a physical examination,a doctor might notice
Reye’s syndrome—A serious, life-threatening ill-
that the liver is enlarged and tender when the abdomen is
ness in children, usually developing after a bout of
palpated (examined with the tips of the fingers while the
flu or chickenpox, and often associated with the
patient lies flat). Blood tests may be used to determine if
use of aspirin. In fatal cases, there is evidence of
the liver is functioning properly. A liver biopsy,where a
accumulation of fat in the liver.
small sample of liver tissue is removed with a long needle
or though a very small incision, can be used to confirm Triglycerides—A type of fat consumed in the diet
fatty liver. In pregnant women,the fatty liver condition is and produced by and stored in the body as an
usually associated with another serious complication,pre- energy source.
eclampsia or eclampsia. In this condition,the mother has
seriously high blood pressure, swelling, and possibly,
seizures. Laboratory abnormalities include elevations of
ble. To prevent Reye’s syndrome,children should not be
the SGOT (serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase) and
given aspirinto treat symptoms of the flu or other viruses.
SGPT (serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase). In many
cases the alkaline phosphatase will be significantly elevat-
Resources
ed due to cholestasisproduced by the fatty infiltration.
BOOKS
“Acute Fatty Liver of Pregnancy.”In Harrison’s Principles of
Treatment
Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:
Treatment involves correcting the condition that McGraw-Hill,1997.
caused fatty liver and providing supportive care. In fatty “Fatty Liver.”The Merck Manual.16th ed. Rahway,NJ:Merck
Research Laboratories,1992.
liver caused by alcoholism, the treatment is to give up
“Fatty Liver (Steatosis).”In Professional Guide to Diseases.
drinking alcohol and to eat a healthy,well balanced diet.
5th ed. Springhouse,PA:Springhouse Corporation,1995.
In fatty liver associated with pregnancy,the recommend-
Friedman,Scott L. “Cirrhosis of the Liver and Its Major Seque-
ed treatment is to deliver the baby,if the pregnancy is far
lae.”In Cecil Textbook of Medicine,ed. J. Claude Bennett
enough along. Vitamin and mineral supplements along and Fred Plum. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
with nutritional support may be useful. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Prognosis PERIODICALS
Everson,Gregory T. “Liver Problems in Pregnancy:Part 2,
Fatty liver is usually reversible if recognized and
Managing Pre-Existing and Pregnancy-Induced Liver Dis-
treated. There may be some long-term tendency toward
ease.”Medscape Women’s Health3,no. 2 (1998).
other types of liver problems depending on how long and
Altha Roberts Edgren
how severe the fatty liver condition was. In pregnant
women with the condition, the situation can be life
Febrile agglutination tests see Fever
threatening for both the mother and the infant. Left
untreated,there is a high risk of deathfor both the moth- evaluation tests
er and baby. Severe liver damage that may require a liver
Fecal fat test see Stool fat test
transplant can occur in the mother if the condition is not
recognized early.
Prevention Fecal incontinence
Prevention consists of maintaining a well balanced diet
Definition
and healthy lifestyle with moderate or no alcohol consump-
tion. Pregnant women require good prenatal care so that Fecal incontinence is the inability to control the pas-
symptoms can be recognized and treated as early as possi- sage of gas or stools (feces) through the anus. For some
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1299
Fecal
incontinence
people fecal incontinence is a relatively minor problem, incontinence is usually restricted to gas, but for some
as when it is limited to a slight occasional soiling of women involves the passing of liquid or solid stools.
underwear,but for other people it involves a considerable
The removal of hemorrhoids by surgery or other
loss of bowel control and has a devastating effect on
techniques (hemorrhoidectomies) can also cause anal
quality of life and psychological well-being. Fortunately,
damage and fecal incontinence, as can more complex
professional medical treatment is usually able to restore
operations affecting the anus and surrounding areas. Anal
bowel control or at least substantially reduce the severity
and rectal infections as well as Crohn’s diseasecan lead
of the condition.
to incontinence by damaging the muscles that control
defecation. For some people, incontinence becomes a
problem when the anal muscles begin to weaken in
Description
midlife or old age.
Fecal incontinence,also called bowel incontinence,
Dementia,mental retardation,strokes,brain tumors,
can occur at any age,but is most common among people
multiple sclerosis,and other conditions that affect the ner-
over the age of 65, who sometimes have to cope with
vous system can cause fecal incontinence by interfering
urinary incontinenceas well. It was reported in 1998
withmuscle function or the normal rectal sensations that
that about 2% of adults experience fecal incontinence at
trigger sphincter contraction and are necessary for
least once a week whereas for healthy independent adults
bowel control. One study of multiple sclerosis patients
over the age of 65 the figure is about 7%. An extensive
discovered that about half were incontinent. Nerve
American survey,published in 1993,found fecal soiling
damage caused by long-lasting diabetes mellitus(dia-
in 7.1% of the surveyed population,with gross inconti-
betic neuropathy) is another condition that can give
nence in 0.7%. For men and women the incidence of
rise to incontinence.
soiling was the same,but women were almost twice as
likely to suffer from gross incontinence.
Diagnosis
The wider public health impact of fecal incontinence
is considerable. In the United States, more than $400 Medical assessments in cases of fecal incontinence
million is spent each year on disposable underwear and typically involve three steps:asking questions about the
other incontinence aids. Fecal incontinence is the second patient’s past and current health (the medical history); a
most common reason for seeking a nursing home place- physical examinationof the anal region; and testing for
ment. One-third of the institutionalized elderly suffer objective information regarding anal and rectal function.
from this condition. Incontinence sufferers, however,
often hesitate to ask their doctors for help because they
Patient history
are embarrassed or ashamed. The 1993 American survey
discovered that only one-sixth of those experiencing soil- The medical history relies on questions that allow
ing had sought medical advice, and only one-half of the doctor to evaluate the nature and severity of the
those afflicted with gross incontinence. problem and its effect on the patient’s life. The doctor
asks, for instance, how long the patient has been suf-
fering from incontinence; how often and under what
Causes and symptoms circumstances incontinence occurs; whether the patient
has any control over defecation; and whether the
Fecal incontinence can result from a wide variety of
patient has obstacles to defecation in his or her every-
medical conditions, including childbirth-related anal
day surroundings,such as a toilet that can be reached
injuries,other causes of damage to the anus or rectum,
only by climbing a long flight of stairs. For women
and nervous system problems.
who have given birth, a detailed obstetric history is
Vaginal-delivery childbirthis a major cause of fecal
also necessary.
incontinence. In many cases,childbirth results in damage
to the anal sphincter, which is the ring of muscle that
Physical examination
closes the anus and keeps stools within the rectum until a
person can find an appropriate opportunity to defecate. The physical examination begins with a visual
Nerve injuries during childbirth may also be a factor in inspection of the anus and the area lying between the
some cases. An ultrasound study of first-time mothers anus and the genitals (the perineum) for hemorrhoids,
found sphincter injuries in 35%. About one-third of the infections, and other conditions that might explain the
injured women developed fecal incontinence or an patient’s difficulties. During this phase of the examina-
uncontrollable and powerful urge to defecate (urgency) tion the doctor asks the patient to bear down. Bearing
within six weeks of giving birth. Childbirth-related down enables the doctor to check whether rectal pro-
1300 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ecnenitnocni
laceF
lapse or certain other problems exist. Rectal prolapse
means that the patient’s rectum has been weakened and KEY TERMS
drops down through the anus. Next,the doctor uses a pin
or probe to strokethe perianal skin. Normally this touch- Anus—The opening at the lower end of the rectum.
ing causes the anal sphincter to contract and the anus to
Colostomy—A surgical procedure in which an
pucker; if it does not,nerve damage may be present. The
opening is made in the wall of the abdomen to
final phase of the examination requires the doctor to
allow a part of the large intestine (the colon) to
examine internal structures by carefully inserting a
empty outside the body.
gloved and lubricated finger into the anal canal. This
allows the doctor to judge the strength of the anal sphinc- Crohn’s disease—A disease marked by inflamma-
ter and a key muscle (the puborectalis muscle) in main- tion of the intestines.
taining continence; to look for abnormalities such as Defecation—Passage of stools through the anus.
scars and rectal masses; and to learn many other things
Hemorrhoids—Enlarged veins in the anus or rec-
about the patient’s medical situation. At this point the
tum. They are sometimes associated with fecal
doctor performs the anal wink test again and asks the
incontinence.
patient to squeeze and bear down.
Rectum—The lower section of the large intestine
that holds stools before defecation.
Laboratory tests
Sphincter—A circular band of muscle that sur-
Information from the medical history and physical
rounds and encloses an opening to the body or to
examination usually needs to be supplemented by tests
one of its hollow organs. Damage to the sphincter
that provide objective measurements of anal and rectal
surrounding the anus can cause fecal incontinence.
function. Anorectal manometry, a common procedure,
involves inserting a small tube (catheter) or balloon Stools—Undigested food and other waste that is
device into the anal canal or rectum. Manometry mea- eliminated through the anus.
sures, among other things, pressure levels in the anal Suppository—A solid medication that slowly dis-
canal,rectal sensation,and anal and rectal reflexes. Tests solves after being inserted into the rectum or other
are also available for assessing nerve damage. An anal body cavity.
ultrasound probe can supply accurate images of the anal
sphincter and reveal whether injury has occurred. Mag-
netic resonance imaging,which requires the insertion of
a coil into the anal canal,is useful at times.
people have this ability. Biofeedback training begins
with the insertion into the rectum of a balloon manome-
try device hooked up to a pressure monitor. The presence
Treatment
of stools in the rectum is simulated by inflating the bal-
Fecal incontinence arising from an underlying con- loon,which causes pressure changes that are recorded on
dition such as diabetic neuropathy can sometimes be the monitor. The monitor also records sphincter contrac-
helped by treating the underlying condition. When that tion. By watching the monitor and following instructions
does not work,or no underlying condition can be discov- from the equipment operator,the patient gradually learns
ered,one approach is to have the patient use a supposito- to contract the sphincter automatically in response to
ry or enema to stimulate defecation at the same time fullness in the rectum. Sometimes one training session is
every day or every other day. The goal is to restore regu- enough,but often several are needed. Biofeedback is not
lar bowel habits and keep the bowels free of stools. Med- an appropriate treatment in all cases,however. It is used
ications such as loperamide (Imodium) and codeine only with patients who are highly motivated; who are
phosphate are often effective in halting incontinence,but able,to some extent,to sense the presence of stools in the
only in less severe cases involving liquid stools or rectum; and who have not lost all ability to contract the
urgency. Dietary changes and exercises done at home to external anal sphincter. One specialist suggests that pos-
strengthen the anal muscles may also help. sibly two-thirds of incontinence sufferers are candidates
Good results have been reported for biofeedback for biofeedback.
training, although the subject has not been properly
researched. In successful cases,patients regain complete Some people may require surgery. Sphincter damage
control over defecation,or at least improve their control, caused by childbirth is often effectively treated with
by learning to contract the external part of the anal surgery, however, as are certain other kinds of inconti-
sphincter whenever stools enter the rectum. All healthy nence-related sphincter injuries. Sometimes surgical treat-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1301
Fecal
incontinence
ment requires building an artificial sphincter using a thigh examination of the rectum. It is used to detect micro-
muscle (the gracilis muscle). At one time a colostomywas scopic blood in the stool and is a screening tool for col-
necessary for severe cases of incontinence, but is now orectal cancer.
rarely performed.
Purpose
Prognosis
FOBT uses chemical indicators on stool samples to
Fecal incontinence is a problem that usually
detect the presence of blood not otherwise visible. (The
responds well to professional medical treatment,even
word “occult”in the test’s name means that the blood is
among elderly and institutionalized patients. If com-
hidden from view.) Blood originating from or passing
plete bowel control cannot be restored, the impact of
through the gastrointestinal tract can signal many condi-
incontinence on everyday life can still be lessened con-
tions requiring further diagnostic procedures and,possi-
siderably in most cases. When incontinence remains a
bly, medical intervention. These conditions may be
problem despite medical treatment,disposable under-
benign or malignant and some of them include:
wear and other commercial incontinence products are
available to make life easier. Doctors and nurses can •colorectal and gastric cancers
offer advice on coping with incontinence, and people
•ulcers
should never be embarrassed about seeking their assis-
•hemorrhoids
tance. Counseling and information are also available
from support groups. •polyps
•inflammatory bowel disease
Resources
•irritations or lesions of the gastrointestinal tract caused
BOOKS
by medications (such as nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
Schiller,Lawrence R. “Fecal Incontinence.”In Sleisenger &
tory drugs,also called NSAIDs)
Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease,ed. Mark
Feldman,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997. •irritations or lesions of the gastrointestinal tract caused
by stomach acid disorders,such as reflux esophagitis
PERIODICALS
Hirsh,Tina,and Tony Lembo. “Diagnosis and Management of The FOBT is used routinely (in conjunction with a
Fecal Incontinence in Elderly Patients.”American Family rectal examinationperformed by a physician) to screen
Physician(Oct. 1996):1559+. for colorectal cancer,particularly after age 50. The order-
Kamm,Michael A. “Faecal Incontinence.”British Medical ing of this test should not be taken as an indication that
Journal316 (1998):528+.
cancer is suspected. The FOBT must be combined with
ORGANIZATIONS regular screening endoscopy (such as a sigmoidoscopy)
International Foundation for Functional Gastrointestinal Disor- to detect cancers at an early stage.
ders. PO Box 17864,Milwaukee,WI 53217. (888) 964-
2001. <http://www.iffgd.org>.
Precautions
National Association for Continence. PO Box 8310,Spartanburg,
SC 29305-8310. (800) 252-3337. <http://www.nafc.org>.
Certain foods and medicines can influence the test
National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse. 2 Infor-
results. Some fruits contain chemicals that prevent the
mation Way,Bethesda,MD 20892-3570. (800) 891-5389.
guaiac,the chemical in which the test paper is soaked,
<http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health/digest/nddic.htm>.
from reacting with the blood. Aspirinand some NSAIDs
irritate the stomach,resulting in bleeding and should be
Howard Baker
avoided prior to the examination, along with red meat
and many vegetables and fruits containing vitamin C. All
Fecal lipids test see Stool fat test
of these factors could result in a false-positive test.
Description
Feces for the stool samples is obtained either by the
Fecal occult blood test
physician at the rectal examination or by the patient at
home, using a small spatula or a collection device. In
Definition
most cases,the collection of stool samples can easily be
The fecal occult blood test (FOBT) is performed as done at home,using a kit supplied by the physician. The
part of the routine physical examination during the standard kit contains a specially prepared card on which
1302 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tset
doolb
tlucco
laceF
a small sample of stool will be spread,using a stick pro-
vided in the kit. The sample is placed in a special enve- KEY TERMS
lope and either mailed or brought in for analysis. When
the physician applies hydrogen peroxide to the back of Occult—Not visible or easily detected.
the sample, the paper will turn blue if an abnormal
amount of blood is present.
Types of fecal occult blood tests Positive results
Hemoccult is one type of fecal occult blood test,and It is important to note that a true-positive finding
it is the most commonly used. The Hemoccult test takes only signifies the presence of blood—it is not an indica-
less than five minutes to perform and may be performed tion of cancer. The National Cancer Institute states that,
in the physician’s office or in the laboratory. The Hemoc- in its experience, less than 10% of all positive results
cult blood test can detect bleeding from the colon as low were caused by cancer. The FOBT is positive in 1–5% of
as 0.5 mg per day. the unscreened population and 2–10% of those are found
Tests that use anti-hemoglobin antibodies (or to have cancer. The physician will want to follow up on a
immunochemical tests) to detect blood in the stool are positive result with further tests, as indicated by other
also used. Immunochemical tests can detect up to 0.7 mg factors in the patient’s history or condition.
of hemoglobin in the stool and do not require dietary
restrictions. Immunochemical tests Negative results
•are not accurate for screening for stomach cancer
Alternatively,a negative result (meaning no blood
•are more sensitive than Hemoccult tests in detecting was detected) does not guarantee the absence of colon
colorectal cancer cancer,which may bleed only occasionally or not at all.
(Only 50% of colon cancers are FOBT-positive.)
•are more expensive than Hemoccult tests
Hemoquant,another fecal occult blood test,is used
Conclusions
to detect as much as 500 mg/g of blood in the stool. Like
the Hemoccult, the Hemoquant test is affected by red Screening using the FOBT has been demonstrated to
meat. It is not affected by chemicals in vegetables. reduce colorectal cancer. However,because only half of
colorectal cancers are FOBT-positive, FOBT must be
Fecal blood may also be measured by measuring the
combined with regular screening endoscopy to increase
chromium in the red blood cells in the feces. The stool is
the detection of pre-malignant colorectal polyps and can-
collected for three to ten days. The test is used in cases
cers. Since,through FOBT,cancer may be detected early,
where the exact amount of the blood loss is required and
the benefits of possible early detection must be consid-
it is the only test that can exclude blood loss from the
ered along with the likelihood of complications and costs
gastrointestines with accuracy.
for additional studies.
Preparation
Resources
For 72 hours prior to collecting samples, patients
BOOKS
should avoid red meats, NSAIDs (including aspirin),
DeVita,Vincent,Samuel Hellman,and Steven Rosenburg.
antacids, steroids, iron supplements, and vitamin C,
Cancer:Principles and Practices of Oncology.PA:Lip-
including citrus fruits and other foods containing large
pincott Williams & Wilkins,2001.
amounts of vitamin C. Foods like uncooked broccoli, Yamada,Tadetaka,ed. Textbook of Gastroenterology Volumes
uncooked turnips, cauliflower, uncooked cantaloupe, One and Two.PA:Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,2001.
uncooked radish and horseradish and parsnips should be
avoided and not eaten during the 72 hours prior to the PERIODICALS
examination. Fish,chicken,pork,fruits (other than mel- From the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Trends
in Screening for Colorectal Cancer—United States,1997
ons) and many cooked vegetables are permitted in the diet.
and 1999.”Journal of the American Medical Association
28 (March 2001):12.
Results
ORGANIZATIONS
Many factors can result in false-positive and false- American Cancer Society. (800) ACS-2345. <http://www.
negative findings. cancer.org>.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1303
Fecal
occult
blood
test
National Cancer Institute (NCI). (800) 422-6237. <http://rex. their movements to limit pain. Often these changed
nci.nih.gov>. movements remain after the pain from the original
injury is gone, and new pain may occur. Feldenkrais
OTHER
helps students become aware of the changed movements
“Colorectal Cancer Screening.”WebMD.<http://my.webmd.
and allows them to learn new movements that relieve
com/content/article/2955.291>.
“Fecal Occult Bood Test.”Virtual Health Fair.10 July 2001 their pain. Apart from the obvious physical benefits of
<http://vfair.com/resources/ lab/fecal.htm>. more efficient movement and freedom from pain and
“Colon and Rectum Cancer.”American Cancer Society.10 July restriction,Feldenkrais practitioners assert that there are
2001 <http://www.cancer.org>. other positive benefits for overall physical and mental
health. Feldenkrais can result in increased awareness,
Jill S. Lasker flexibility, and coordination, and better relaxation.
Cheryl Branche,M.D. Feldenkrais practitioners have also noted other benefits
in their students,including improvements in awareness,
flexibility, coordination, breathing, digestion, sleep,
mood,mental alertness,energy,and range of motion,as
well as reduced stress and hypertension, and fewer
Feldenkrais method headaches and backaches.
Musicians and athletes can improve their perfor-
mance in many ways when they learn to use their bodies
Definition
more efficiently. Feldenkrais can also help injured ath-
The Feldenkrais method is an educational system letes regain lost potential and free them from pain and
that allows the body to move and function more effi- restriction of movement.
ciently and comfortably. Its goal is to re-educate the
There are numerous accounts of the remarkable
nervous system and improve motor ability. The system
results obtained when Feldenkrais is taught to handi-
can accomplish much more,relieving pressure on joints
capped children so that they can learn to function despite
and weak points,and allowing the body to heal repeti-
their limitations. Handicapped people can learn to make
tive strain injuries. Continued use of the method can
full use of whatever potential they have, and to have
relieve pain and lead to higher standards of achieve-
more confidence in their abilities. Practitioners who spe-
ment in sports,the martial arts,dancing and other phys-
cialize in teaching Feldenkrais to those who have handi-
ical disciplines.
caps have in many cases allowed the patient to discover
Pupils are taught to become aware of their move- ways of performing tasks which were previously thought
ments and to become aware of how they use their bodies, to be impossible for them.
thus discovering possible areas of stressand strain. The
The elderly,whose movements are often restricted
goal of Feldenkrais is to take the individual from merely
by pain and stiffness,can learn to overcome these obsta-
functioning,to functioning well,free of pain and restric-
cles with Feldenkrais instruction. In some instances even
tion of movement. Feldenkrais himself stated that his
severe cases of arthritis have been conquered. Theoreti-
goal was,“To make the impossible possible,the possible
cally,Feldenkrais can make possible renewed levels of
easy,and the easy,elegant.”
energy and freedom from restriction.
Purpose
Description
This method of re-educating the nervous system
can be beneficial to a wide range of people,including Origins
athletes,children,the elderly,martial artists,those who
Moshe Feldenkrais (1904–1984) was a Russian-
are handicapped,people with special needs,and those
born Israeli physicist and engineer who was also an
suffering from degenerative diseases. It has also
active soccer player and judo master. He devised his
proved popular with artists, particularly musicians, a
system in response to his own recurring knee injury,
number of whom have used Feldenkrais to improve
which had restricted his movement and caused him
their performance.
great pain over a long period of time. Feldenkrais
The Feldenkrais Guild of North America (FGNA) believed that repeated muscle patterns cause the parts
states that over half of the those who turn to Feldenkrais of the brain controlling those muscles to stay in a fixed
practitioners are seeking relief from pain. Many people pattern as well. He thought that the more the muscles
who have pain from an injury compensate by changing are used, the more parts of the brain can be activated.
1304 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
dohtem
siarknedleF
He devised a method of re-educating the neuromuscular
system and re-evaluating movement to increase effi- MOSHE FELDENKRAIS
ciency and reduce stress, using his knowledge of (1904–1984)
mechanics and engineering,and applying some of his
martial arts training. Moshe Feldenkrais was born on the border
Feldenkrais is described a being a dual system,with between Russia and Poland. When he was only a boy of
13, he traveled to Palestine on foot. The journey took a
two components:“Awareness Through Movement”and
year, and once there, young Feldenkrais worked as a
“Functional Integration.”The system aims to re-educate
laborer and cartographer, also tutoring others in mathe-
the body so that habitual movements that cause strain or
matics. Moving to France in 1933, he graduated in
pain can be relearned to improve efficiency and eliminate
mechanical and electrical engineering from the Ecole
dangerous or painful action.
des Travaux Publiques de Paris.
Feldenkrais helps to translate intention into action. Feldendrais became the first person to open a Judo
In practice,an individual can learn to achieve his or her center in Paris after meeting with Jigaro Kano. He was
highest potential, while at the same time learning to also one of the first Europeans to become a black belt in
avoid and eliminate stresses,strains,and the possibility Judo, in 1936.
of injury. Obtaining his Ph.D. at the Sorbonne, he went on to
assist Nobel Prize laureate, Frédéric Joliot-Curie at the
Functional integration Curie Institute. During World War II in England, he
worked on the new sonar anti-submarine research.
During this session,the patient wears comfortable
Prompted by a recurring leg injury, he applied his
clothing, and may sit, stand, walk, or lie on a low
knowledge of the martial arts and his training as an
padded table. The practitioner helps the pupil by guid-
engineer to devise a method of re-integrating the body.
ing him or her through a number of movements. The
The concept was that more efficient movement would
practitioner may use touch to communicate with the
allow for the treatment of pain or disability, and the bet-
student, but touch is not used to correct any move- ter-functioning of the body as a whole. Later on, he
ments. The purpose of this session is to increase a stu- would begin to teach what he had learned to others in
dent’s awareness of his or her own movement and Tel Aviv.
become open to different possibilities for movement.
In addition to many books about judo, including
The instruction can be focused on a particular activity Higher Judo, he wrote six books on his method.
that the student does every day, or that causes him or
Patricia Skinner
her pain. The student can learn to alter habitual move-
ments and re-educate the neuromuscular system. This
type of session is particularly useful for those who
suffer from limitations originating from misuse,
stress,illness,or accident. It can also help athletes and are encouraged to observe and learn about themselves and
musicians perform to the best of their ability by their movements. The range of this therapy is wide,and
increasing their possibilities for movement. It offers there are thousands of different lessons designed to help
students the potential for improving their physical and specific areas.
mental performance in addition to heightening the
sense of well-being.
Preparations
Awareness through movement No preparation is necessary for the practice of
Feldenkrais, and all are encouraged to seek help from
Feldenkrais’s martial arts background can be clear-
this system. No condition is considered a preclusion to
ly identified in many of the aspects of Awareness
the benefits of Feldenkrais.
Through Movement (ATM). During group sessions,
pupils are taught to become acutely aware of all their
movements and to imagine them, so that they can Precautions
improve the efficiency of their actions in their minds,
As with any therapy or treatment, care should be
and put them into practice. Pupils are encouraged to be
taken to choose a qualified practitioner. Feldenkrais prac-
disciplined about practicing their exercises,to achieve
titioners stress that the body must not be forced to do
maximum benefit.
anything, and if any movement is painful, or even
Awareness through movement is described as an uncomfortable, it should be discontinued immediately
exploratory,nonjudgmental process through which pupils and the patient should seek professional help.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1305
Feldenkrais
method
Female condom see Condom
KEY TERMS
Neuromuscular—The body system of nerves and
muscles as they function together.
Female genital mutilation
Repetitive strain injury—Injury resulting from a
repeated movement such as typing or throwing a
Definition
ball.
Female genital mutilation (FGM) is the cutting,or
partial or total removal,of the external female genitalia
for cultural,religious,or other non-medical reasons. It is
Side effects usually performed on girls between the ages of four and
10. It is also called female circumcision.
No known side effects are associated with the prac-
tice of Feldenkrais.
Purpose
Research and general acceptance FGM results in the cutting or removal of the tissues
around the vagina that give women pleasurable sexual
Since Moshe Feldenkrais began to teach his method,
feelings. This procedure is used for social and cultural
it has gradually gained acceptance as an education sys-
control of women’s sexuality. In its most extreme form,
tem. Published research using the method can be found
infibulation,where the girl’s vagina is sewn shut,the pro-
in United States and foreign publications.
cedure ensures virginity. In some cultures where female
circumcision has been a tradition for hundreds of years,
Resources
this procedure is considered a rite of passage for young
BOOKS girls. Families fear that if their daughters are left uncir-
Alon,Ruthy. Mindful Spontaneity:Lessons in the Feldenkrais cumcised,they may not be marriageable. As in most cul-
Method.2nd ed. Berkeley:North Atlantic Books,1996. tures, there is also the fear that the girl might bring
Bratman,Steven. The Alternative Medicine Sourcebook.2nd shame to the family by being sexually active and becom-
ed. Chicago:Lowell House,1999.
ing pregnant before marriage.
Feldenkrais,Moshe. Awareness Through Movement.New
York:Harper,1991.
Rywerant,Yochanan. The Feldenkrais Method.Chicago:Keats Precautions
Publishing,1991.
It is illegal to perform FGM in many countries,
Shafarman,Steven. Awareness Heals:The Feldenkrais Method
including the United States, Canada, France, Great
for Dynamic Health.Cambridge,MA:Perseus Publish-
ing,1997. Britain,Sweden,Switzerland,Egypt,Kenya,and Sene-
Somerville,Robert. Alternative Medicine:The Definitive Guide. gal. This procedure is usually done in the home or some-
Tiburon,CA:Future Medicine Publishing,Inc.,1999. where other than a medical setting. Often,it is performed
Stillerman,Elaine. The Encyclopedia of Bodywork.New York: by a family member or by a local “circumciser,” using
Facts On File,Inc.,1996. knives,razor blades,or other tools that may not be steril-
Thomas,Richard,and C. Norman Shealy,eds. The Complete ized before use.
Family Guide to Alternative Medicine.Dorset,UK:Ele-
ment Books Ltd.,1996.
Zemach-Bersin,David and Kaethe,and Mark Reese. Relaxer- Description
cise.New York:Harper,1990.
Female circumcision includes a wide range of pro-
ORGANIZATIONS cedures. The simplest form involves a small cut to the
Feldenkrais Guild of North America. 3611 SW Hood Ave.,Suite clitoris or labial tissue. A Sunna circumcision removes
100,Portland,OR 97201. (800) 775-2118. (503) 221-6612. the prepuce (a fold of skin that covers the clitoris) and/or
Fax:(503) 221-6616. <http://www.feldenkrais.com/>. the tip of the clitoris. A clitoridectomy removes the entire
clitoris and some or all of the surrounding tissue; this
Jill S. Lasker
procedure occurs in approximately 80% of cases. The
Cheryl Branche,M.D.
most extreme form of genital mutilation is excision and
infibulation,in which the clitoris and all of the surround
Female circumcision see Female genital
tissue are cut away and the remaining skin is sewn
mutilation together. Only a small opening is left for the passage of
1306 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitalitum
latineg
elameF
urine and menstrual blood. Infibulation accounts for
approximately 15% of FGM procedures. KEY TERMS
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates
that between 100 million and 140 million girls and Circumcision—A procedure, usually with reli-
women have undergone some form of FGM. As a very gious or cultural significance, where the prepuce
deeply rooted cultural and religious tradition still prac- or skin covering the tip of the penis on a boy, or
ticed in over 28 African and Asian countries,up to two the clitoris on a girl, is cut away.
million girls per year are at risk. The following countries Clitoridectomy—A procedure where the clitoris
have the highest number of occurrences of FGM: Dji- and possibly some of the surrounding labial tissue
bouti (98%),Egypt (97%),Eritrea (95%),Guinea (99%), at the opening of the vagina is cut away.
Mali (94%), Sierra Leone (90%), and Somalia (98-
Infibulation—A procedure where the tissue around
100%). As more people move to Western countries from
the vagina is sewn shut, leaving only a small open-
countries where female circumcision is performed,the
ing for the passage of urine and menstrual blood.
practice has come to the attention of health professionals
in the United States,Canada,Europe,and Australia.
In an effort to integrate old customs with modern
medical care,some immigrant families have requested who have been infibulated may have to have the labial
that physicians perform the procedure. While trying to tissue cut open to allow the baby to be delivered. After-
be sensitive to cultural traditions, health care care should be provided with a supportive and nonjudg-
providers are sometimes put in the difficult position of mental approach towards the girls and women who have
choosing to perform this procedure in a medical facili- undergone this procedure.
ty under sanitary conditions, or refusing the request,
knowing that it may be done anyway with no medical
supervision. Some families who are intent on having Risks
this procedure done will take their daughters back to The immediate risks after the procedure are hemor-
the country they immigrated from in order to have the rhage (excessive bleeding), severe pain, and infection
girls circumcised. (including abscesses,tetanus,and gangrene). The most
Many national and international medical organiza- severe consequence is deathdue to excessive blood loss.
tions including the American Medical Association Long term complications include scarring,interference
(AMA), Canadian medical organizations, and WHO with the drainage of urine and menstrual blood,chronic
oppose the practice of female genital mutilation. The urinary tract infections,pelvic and back pain,and infer-
United Nations (UN) considers female genital mutilation tility. Sexual intercourse can be painful. Complications
a violation of human rights. WHO has undertaken a num- of childbirthare also a risk. It is unclear whether it is
ber of projects aimed at decreasing the incidence of related to the procedure itself,or related to the general
FGM. These include the following activities: condition of medical practice, but infant and maternal
death rates are generally higher in those communities
•publishing a statement addressing the regional status of
where female circumcision is practiced.
FGM and encouraging the development of national pol-
icy against its practice,
•organizing training for regional community workers, Resources
•developing educational materials for local health care PERIODICALS
Eyega,Z.,and E. Conneely. “Facts and Fiction Regarding
workers,
Female Circumcision/Female Genital Mutilation:A Pilot
•providing alternative occupations for individuals who Study in New York City.”Journal of American Medical
perform FGM procedures. Women’s Association52,no. 4 (Fall 1997):174-178,187.
“Female Genital Mutilation:At the Crossroads of Women’s
Health & Human Rights.”Public Health Magazine 5 no. 1
Aftercare (Winter 1995).
Jones,W.K.,et al. “Female Genital Mutilation. Female Cir-
A girl or young woman who has recently had the
cumcision. Who Is At Risk In the U.S.?”Public Health
procedure performed may require supportive care to con-
Report 112,no. 5 (Sept./Oct. 1997):368-377.
trol bleeding and antibiotics to prevent infection. Ortiz,E.T. “Female Genital Mutilation and Public Health:
Women who were circumcised as children may require Lessons From the British Experience.”Health Care
medical care to treat complications. Pregnant women Women International 19,no. 2 (Mar./Apr. 1998):119-129.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1307
Female
genital
mutilation
Winkel,E. “A Muslim Perspective on Female Circumcision.” unable to reach orgasm. She may also have pain during
Women & Health 23,no. 1 (1995):1-7. sex or orgasm,which interferes with her desire for inter-
course.
OTHER
The Female Genital Mutilation Research Homepage.<http://
www.hollyfeld.org/fgm. Diagnosis
“Female Genital Mutilation.”The World Health Organization.
<http://www.who.int/frh-whd/FGM/index.htm. To make a diagnosis,a woman’s physician - either
family doctor,gynecologist,or even urologist — takes a
Altha Roberts Edgren complete medical history to determine when the problem
started, how it presents, how severe it is, and what the
patient thinks may be causing it. The doctor will also
conduct a complete physical examination,looking for
any abnormalities in the genital region
Female sexual arousal disorder
Treatment
Definition
The physician should start by providing education
Female sexual arousal disorder (FSAD) occurs when
about the disorder and recommending various non-med-
a woman is continually unable to attain or maintain
ical treatment strategies. These include:
arousal and lubrication during intercourse,is unable to
reach orgasm,or has no desire for sexual intercourse. •use of erotic materials,such as vibrators,books,maga-
zines and videos
Description •sensual massage,avoiding the genitals
•position changes to reduce pain
The disorder typically affects up to 25 percent of all
American women, or an estimated 47 million women. •use of lubricants to moisten the vagina and genital area
Three-fourths of women with FSAD are postmenopausal.
•kegel exercises to strengthen the vagina and clitoris
Women describe it as being “unable to get turned on,”or
being continually disinterested in sex. It is also called •therapy to overcome any relationship or sexual abuse
“frigidity.”Other terms for the disorder include dyspareu- issues
nia and vaginismus,both of which involve painduring Medical treatments include:
intercourse.
•estrogen replacement therapy, which may help with
vaginal dryness,pain and arousal
Causes and symptoms
•testosterone therapy in women who have low levels of
There are numerous causes of this disorder. They this male hormone (side effects,however,may include
include: deepening voice,hair growth,and acne)
•physical problems,such as endometriosis,cystitis,or •the EROS clitoral therapy device (EROS-CTD),recent-
vaginitis ly approved by the Food and Drug Administration; a
small vacuum pump,placed over the clitoris and gently
•systemic problems,such as diabetes,high blood pressure,
activated to provide a gentle suction designed to
or hypothyroidism. Even pregnancyor the postpartum
increase blood flow to the region,which,in turn,helps
period (time after delivery of a child) may affect desire.
with arousal
Menopauseis also known to reduce sexual desire.
•using the herb yohimbine combined with nitric oxide
•medications, including oral contraceptives, anti-
has been found to increase vaginal blood flow in post-
depressants,antihypertensives,and tranquilizers
menopausal women and thus help with some forms of
•surgery,such as mastectomyor hysterectomywhich
FSAD
may affect how a woman feels about her sexual self.
•stress
Alternative treatment
•depression
Natural estrogens,such as those found in soy prod-
•use of alcohol,drugs,or cigarette smoking
ucts and flax,may be effective. Herbal remedies include
Symptoms vary. A woman may have no desire for belladonna,gingko,and motherwort. However,there is
sex,or may not be able to maintain arousal,or may be no scientific evidence to prove these herbs actually help.
1308 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
redrosid
lasuora
lauxes
elameF
ORGANIZATIONS
KEY TERMS Female Sexual Medicine Center UCLA Medical Center 924
Westwood Blvd.,Suite 520 Los Angeles,CA 90024.
(310) 825-0025 <www.newshe.com>.
Dyspareunia— pain in the pelvic area during or
National Women’s Health Resource Center,120 Albany Street
after sexual intercourse.
Suite 820 New Brunswick,NJ 08901. (877) 986-9472.
Vaginismus —An involuntary spasm of the mus- <www.healthywomen.org>.
cles surrounding the vagina, making penetration
painful or impossible. Debra Gordon
Female infertility see Infertility
Femoral hernia see Hernia
Some women squirt vitamin E in their vagina to increase
lubrication.
Women may also want to see a sexual therapist for
additional help.
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Prognosis
Definition
Generally, once women seek the appropriate help
they are quite likely to find a way to resolve their prob- Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is a pattern of birth
lems. Often,a holistic approach,using physical as well defects, learning, and behavioral problems affecting
as emotional therapies,is required for success. individuals whose mothers consumed alcohol during
pregnancy.
Prevention
Description
Maintaining a close and open relationship with a
FAS is the most common preventable cause of men-
partner is one way to avoid the emotional pain and isola-
tal retardation. This condition was first recognized and
tion that can lead to sexual dysfunction. Additionally,
reported in the medical literature in 1968 in France and in
women should learn if any medications they take affect
1973 in the United States. Alcohol is a teratogen,the term
sexual function, and should refrain from alcohol and
used for any drug, chemical, maternal disease or other
drugs and quit smoking. Women who have anxieties and
environmental exposure that can cause birth defects or
fears about sexual intercourse,whether because of earlier
functional impairment in a developing fetus. Some fea-
abuse, rape, or a prudish upbringing, should deal with
tures may be present at birth including low birth weight,
those issues through therapy.
prematurity,and microcephaly. Characteristic facial fea-
tures may be present at birth,or may become more obvi-
Resources ous over time. Signs of brain damage include delays in
development,behavioral abnormalities,and mental retar-
BOOKS
dation,but affected individuals exhibit a wide range of
Berman M.D.,Jennifer,and Laura Berman,Phd. Elisabeth
abilities and disabilities. It has only been since 1991 that
Bumiller. For Women Only:A Revolutionary Guide to
Overcoming Sexual Dysfunction and Reclaiming Your Sex the long-term outcome of FAS has been known. Learning,
Life.Henry Holt & Company,Inc.,2001. behavioral,and emotional problems are common in ado-
Reichman,Judith. I’m Not in the Mood:What Every Woman lescents and adults with FAS. Fetal Alcohol Effect (FAE),
Should Know About Improving Her Libido.Quill Publish- a term no longer favored,is sometimes used to describe
ing,1999. individuals with some,but not all,of the features of FAS.
Rako,Susan M.D. The Hormone of Desire:The Truth About In 1996,the Institute of Medicine suggested a five-level
Testosterone,Sexuality,and Menopause.Three Rivers
system to describe the birth defects,learning and behav-
Press,1999.
ioral difficulties in offspring of women who drank alcohol
during pregnancy. This system contains criteria including
PERIODICALS
confirmation of maternal alcohol exposure,characteristic
“Restoring Sexual Health.”Consumer Reports On Health.
facial features,growth problems,learning and behavioral
(March 2001):8-10.
“Consumer Update:Female Sexual Problems.”American Asso- problems,and birth defects known to be associated with
ciation for Marriage and Family Therapy(14 June 1999). prenatal alcohol exposure.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1309
Fetal
alcohol
syndrome
The incidence of FAS varies among different popu- the colored part of the lip and below the nose),thin upper
lations studied, and ranges from approximately one in lip,and small chin. Some of these features are nonspecific,
200 to one in 2000 at birth. However, a recent study meaning they can occur in other conditions,or be appro-
reported in 1997,utilizing the Institute of Medicine crite- priate for age,racial,or family background. Other major
ria,estimated the prevalence in Seattle,Washington from and minor birth defects that have been reported include
1975–1981 at nearly one in 100 live births. Avoiding cleft palate,congenital heart defects,strabismus,hearing
alcohol during pregnancy,including the earliest weeks of loss,defects of the spine and joints,alteration of the hand
the pregnancy can prevent FAS. There is no amount of creases, small fingernails, and toenails. Since FAS was
alcohol use during pregnancy that has been proven to be first described in infants and children, the diagnosis is
completely safe. sometimes more difficult to recognize in older adolescents
and adults. Short stature and microcephaly remain com-
There is no racial or ethnic predilection for FAS.
mon features,but weight may normalize,and the individ-
Individuals from different genetic backgrounds exposed
ual may actually become overweight for his/her height.
to similar amounts of alcohol during pregnancy may
The chin and nose grow proportionately more than the
exhibit different signs or symptoms of FAS. Several stud-
middle part of the face and dental crowding may become a
ies have estimated that between 25–45% of chronic alco-
problem. The small eye openings and the appearance of
holic women will give birth to a child with FAS if they
the upper lip and philtrum may continue to be characteris-
continue to drink during pregnancy. The risk of FAS
tic. Pubertal changes typically occur at the normal time.
appears to increase as a chronic alcoholic woman pro-
gresses in her childbearing years and continues to drink. Newborns with FAS may have difficulties with feed-
That is, a child with FAS will often be one of the last ing due to a poor suck,have irregular sleep-wake cycles,
born to a chronic alcoholic woman,although older sib- decreased or increased muscle tone,seizures or tremors.
lings may exhibit milder features of FAS. Binge drink- Delays in achieving developmental milestones such as
ing, defined as sporadic use of five or more standard rolling over,crawling,walking and talking may become
alcoholic drinks per occasion, and “moderate” daily apparent in infancy. Behavior and learning difficulties typ-
drinking (two to four 12 oz bottles of beer, eight to 16 ical in the preschool or early school years include poor
ounces of wine, two to four ounces of liquor) can also attention span,hyperactivity,poor motor skills,and slow
result in offspring with features of FAS. language development. Attention deficit-hyperactivity dis-
order is a common associated diagnosis. Learning disabili-
ties or mental retardation may be diagnosed during this
Causes and symptoms
time. Arithmetic is often the most difficult subject for a
FAS is not a genetic or inherited disorder. It is a pat- child with FAS. During middle school and high school
tern of birth defects,learning,and behavioral problems years the behavioral difficulties and learning difficulties
that are the result of maternal alcohol use during the can be significant. Memory problems,poor judgment,dif-
pregnancy. The alcohol freely crosses the placenta and ficulties with daily living skills,difficulties with abstract
causes damage to the developing embryo or fetus. Alco- reasoning skills,and poor social skills are often apparent
hol use by the father cannot cause FAS. If a woman who by this time. It is important to note that animal and human
has FAS drinks alcohol during pregnancy,then she may studies have shown that neurologic and behavioral abnor-
also have a child with FAS. Not all individuals from malities can be present without characteristic facial fea-
alcohol exposed pregnancies have obvious signs or tures. These individuals may not be identified as having
symptoms of FAS; individuals of different genetic back- FAS,but may fulfill criteria for alcohol- related diagnoses,
grounds may be more or less susceptible to the damage as set forth by the Institute of Medicine.
that alcohol can cause. The dose of alcohol,the time dur-
In 1991,Streissguth and others reported some of the
ing pregnancy that alcohol is used, and the pattern of
first long-term follow-up studies of adolescents and
alcohol use all contribute to the different signs and symp-
adults with FAS. In the approximate 60 individuals they
toms that are found.
studied,the average IQ was 68,with 70 being the lower
Classic features of FAS include short stature, low limit of the normal range. However,the range of IQ was
birthweight and poor weight gain, microcephaly, and a quite large,as low as 20 (severely retarded) to as high as
characteristic pattern of facial features. These facial fea- 105 (normal). The average achievement levels for read-
tures in infants and children may include small eye open- ing, spelling, and arithmetic were fourth grade, third
ings (measured from inner corner to outer corner),epican- grade and second grade, respectively. The Vineland
thal folds (folds of tissue at the inner corner of the eye), Adaptive Behavior Scale was used to measure adaptive
small or short nose, low or flat nasal bridge, smooth or functioning in these individuals. The composite score for
poorly developed philtrum (the area of the upper lip above this group showed functioning at the level of a seven-
1310 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
lohocla
lateF
year-old. Daily living skills were at a level of nine years,
and social skills were at the level of a six-year-old. KEY TERMS
In 1996,Streissguth and others published further data
regarding the disabilities in children, adolescents and Cleft palate—A congenital malformation in which
adults with FAS. Secondary disabilities,that is,those dis- there is an abnormal opening in the roof of the
abilities not present at birth and that might be preventable mouth that allows the nasal passages and the
with proper diagnosis,treatment,and intervention,were mouth to be improperly connected.
described. These secondary disabilities include: mental Congenital—Refers to a disorder which is present
health problems; disrupted school experiences; trouble at birth.
with the law; incarceration for mental health problems,
IQ—Abbreviation for Intelligence Quotient. Com-
drug abuse, or a crime; inappropriate sexual behavior;
pares an individual’s mental age to his/her true or
alcohol and drug abuse; problems with employment;
chronological age and multiplies that ratio by 100.
dependent living; and difficulties parenting their own chil-
dren. In that study,only seven out of 90 adults were living Microcephaly—An abnormally small head.
and working independently and successfully. In addition Miscarriage—Spontaneous pregnancy loss.
to the studies by Streissguth,several other authors in dif-
Placenta—The organ responsible for oxygen and
ferent countries have now reported on long term outcome
nutrition exchange between a pregnant mother
of individuals diagnosed with FAS. In general,the neuro-
and her developing baby.
logic, behavioral and emotional disorders become the
most problematic for the individuals. The physical features Strabismus—An improper muscle balance of the
change over time,sometimes making the correct diagnosis ocular musles resulting in crossed or divergent eyes.
more difficult in older individuals, without old pho- Teratogen—Any drug, chemical, maternal disease,
tographs and other historical data to review. Mental health or exposure that can cause physical or functional
problems including attention deficit, depression, panic defects in an exposed embryo or fetus.
attacks,psychosisand suicide threats and attempts,and
overall were present in over 90% of the individuals studied
by Streissguth. A 1996 study in Germany reported more
than 70% of the adolescents they studied had persistent Treatment
and severe developmental disabilities and many had psy-
There is no treatment for FAS that will reverse or
chiatric disorders,the most common of which were emo-
change the physical features or brain damage associated
tional disorders,repetitive habits,speech disorders,and
with maternal alcohol use during the pregnancy. Most of
hyperactivity disorders.
the birth defects associated with prenatal alcohol expo-
sure are correctable with surgery. Children should have
Diagnosis
psychoeducational evaluation to help plan appropriate
FAS is a clinical diagnosis,which means that there educational interventions. Common associated diagnoses
is no blood,x ray or psychological test that can be per- such as attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder,depres-
formed to confirm the suspected diagnosis. The diagno- sion,or anxietyshould be recognized and treated appro-
sis is made based on the history of maternal alcohol use, priately. The disabilities that present during childhood
and detailed physical examinationfor the characteristic persist into adult life. However,some of the secondary
major and minor birth defects and characteristic facial disabilities mentioned above may be avoided or lessened
features. It is often helpful to examine siblings and par- by early and correct diagnosis,better understanding of
ents of an individual suspected of having FAS,either in the life-long complications of FAS, and intervention.
person or by photographs,to determine whether findings Streissguth has describe a model in which an individual
on the examination might be familial,of if other siblings affected by FAS has one or more advocates to help pro-
may also be affected. Sometimes,genetic tests are per- vide guidance, structure and support as the individual
formed to rule out other conditions that may present with seeks to become independent, successful in school or
developmental delay or birth defects. Individuals with employment,and develop satisfying social relationships.
developmental delay,birth defects or other unusual fea-
tures are often referred to a clinical geneticist,develop-
Prognosis
mental pediatrician, or neurologist for evaluation and
diagnosis of FAS. Psychoeducational testing to deter- The prognosis for FAS depends on the severity of
mine IQ and/or the presence of learning disabilities may birth defects and the brain damage present at birth. Mis-
also be part of the evaluation process. carriage, stillbirth or death in the first few weeks of
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1311
Fetal
alcohol
syndrome
life may be outcomes in very severe cases. Major birth ORGANIZATIONS
defects associated with FAS are usually treatable with Arc’s Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Resource Guide. The Arc’s Pub-
surgery. Some of the factors that have been found to lication Desk,3300 Pleasant Valley Lane,Suite C,Arling-
reduce the risk of secondary disabilities in FAS individ- ton,TX 76015. (888) 368-8009. <http://www.thearc.org/
uals include diagnosis before the age of six years,stable misc/faslist.html>.
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Family Resource Institute. PO Box
and nurturing home environments,never having experi-
2525,Lynnwood,WA 98036. (800) 999-3429. <http://
enced personal violence,and referral and eligibility for
www.fetalalcoholsyndrome.org>.
disability services. The long-term data helps in under-
Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press,Washington,
standing the difficulties that individuals with FAS
DC. <http://www.come-over.to/FAS/IOMsummary.htm>.
encounter throughout their lifetime and can help fami-
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275 Mamaroneck
lies, caregivers and professionals provide the care, Ave.,White Plains,NY 10605. (888) 663-4637. <resource
supervision, education and treatment geared toward center@modimes.org>. <http://www.modimes.org>.
their special needs. Nofas. 216 G St. NE,Washington,DC 20002. (202) 785-4585.
<http://www.nofas.org>.
Prevention of FAS is the key. Prevention efforts must
include public education efforts aimed at the entire popu-
Laurie Heron Seaver
lation,not just women of child bearing age,appropriate
treatment for women with high-risk drinking habits,and
Ferritin test see Iron tests
increased recognition and knowledge about FAS by pro-
fessionals,parents,and caregivers. Fetal death see Stillbirth
Resources
BOOKS
Jones,Kenneth Lyons. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of
Fetal hemoglobin test
Human Malformation.5th ed. Philadelphia:W.B. Saun-
ders Company,1997.
Definition
Streissguth,Ann. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome:A Guide for Fami-
lies and Communities.Baltimore:Paul H. Brookes Pub- Fetal hemoglobin (Hemoglobin F),Alkali-resistant
lishing Company,1997.
hemoglobin, HBF (or Hb F), is the major hemoglobin
component in the bloodstream of the fetus. After birth,it
PERIODICALS
decreases rapidly until only traces are found in normal
Committee of Substance Abuse and Committee on Children
with Disabilities. “Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and Alcohol- children and adults.
Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders.”Pediatrics106
(Aug. 2000):358-361.
Purpose
Cramer,C.,and F. Davidhizar. “FAS/FAE:Impact on Chil-
dren.”Journal of Child Health Care3 (Autumn 1999): The determination of fetal hemoglobin is an aid in
31-34. evaluating low concentrations of hemoglobin in the
Gladstone,J.,et al. “Reproductive Risks of Binge Drinking blood (anemia),as well as the hereditary persistence of
During Pregnancy.”Reproductive Toxicology10 (Jan./Feb.
fetal hemoglobin, and a group of inherited disorders
1996):3-13.
affecting hemoglobin,among which are the thalassemias
Hannigan,J. H.,and D. R. Armant. “Alcohol in Pregnancy and
and sickle cell anemia.
Neonatal Outcome.”Seminars in Neonatology5 (Aug.
2000):243-54.
Olson,Heather Carmichael,et al. “Association of Prenatal Description
Alcohol Exposure with Behavioral and Learning Prob-
At birth, the newborn’s blood is comprised of
lems in Early Adolescence.”Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry36 (Sept. 60%–90% of fetal hemoglobin. The fetal hemoglobin
1997):1187-1194. then rapidly decreases to 2% or less after the second to
“Prenatal Exposure to Alcohol.”Alcohol Research and Health fourth years. By the time of adulthood,only traces (0.5%
24 (2000):32-41. or less) are found in the bloodstream.
Sampson,Paul D.,et al. “Incidence of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome
In some diseases associated with abnormal hemo-
and Prevalence of Alcohol-Related Neurodevelopmental
globin production (see Hemoglobinopathy,below),fetal
Disorder.”Teratology56 (Nov. 1997):317-326.
hemoglobin may persist in larger amounts. When this
Streissguth,Ann Pytkowicz,et al. “Fetal Alcohol Syndrome in
Adolescents and Adults.”JAMA265 (Apr. 1991):1961- occurs, the elevation raises the question of possible
1967. underlying disease.
1312 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tset
nibolgomeh
lateF
For example,HBF can be found in higher levels in
hereditary hemolytic anemias,in all types of leukemias, KEY TERMS
in pregnancy,diabetes,thyroid disease,and during anti-
convulsant drug therapy. It may also reappear in adults Anemia—A disorder characterized by a reduced
when the bone marrow is overactive,as in the disorders blood level of hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying
of pernicious anemia,multiple myeloma,and metastat- pigment of blood.
ic cancer in the marrow. When HBF is increased after
Hemolytic anemia—A form of anemia caused by
age four,it should be investigated for cause.
premature destruction of red cells in the blood
stream (a process called hemolysis). Hemolytic
Hemoglobinopathy
anemias are classified according to whether the
Hemoglobin is the oxygen-carrying pigment found cause of the problem is inside the red blood cell
in red blood cells. It is a large molecule made in the bone (in which case it is usually an inherited condition),
marrow from two components,heme and globin. or outside the cell (usually acquired later in life).
Defects in hemoglobin production may be either
genetic or acquired. The genetic defects are further sub-
divided into errors of heme production (porphyria),and
Abnormal results
those of globin production (known collectively as the
hemoglobinopathies). Greater than 2% of total hemoglobin is abnormal.
There are two categories of hemoglobinopathy. In
the first category, abnormal globin chains give rise to Resources
abnormal hemoglobin molecules. In the second category,
BOOKS
normal hemoglobin chains are produced but in abnormal Cahill,Mathew. Handbook of Diagnostic Tests.Springhouse,
amounts. An example of the first category is the disorder PA:Springhouse Corporation,1995.
of sickle cell anemia,the inherited condition character- Jacobs,David S.,et al. Laboratory Test Handbook.4th ed. New
ized by curved (sickle-shaped) red blood cells and chron- York:Lexi-Comp Inc.,1996.
ic hemolytic anemia. Disorders in the second category Pagana,Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
are called the thalassemias, which are further divided Laboratory Tests.St. Louis:Mosby,Inc.,1998.
into types according to which amino acid chain is affect-
ed (alpha or beta), and whether there is one defective Janis O. Flores
gene (thalassemiaminor) or two defective genes (tha-
Fetishes see Sexual perversions
lassemia major).
Preparation
This test requires a blood sample. The patient is not
required to be in a fastingstate (nothing to eat or drink Fever
for a period of hours before the test).
Definition
A fever is any body temperature elevation over
Risks
100°F (37.8°C).
Risks for this test are minimal, but may include
slight bleeding from the blood-drawing site,faintingor
Description
feeling lightheaded after venipuncture, or hematoma
A healthy person’s body temperature fluctuates
(blood accumulating under the puncture site).
between 97°F (36.1°C) and 100°F (37.8°C), with the
average being 98.6°F (37°C). The body maintains stabili-
Normal results
ty within this range by balancing the heat produced by the
metabolism with the heat lost to the environment. The
Reference values vary from laboratory to laboratory
“thermostat”that controls this process is located in the
but are generally found within the following ranges:
hypothalamus,a small structure located deep within the
•six months to adult:up to 2% of the total hemoglobin
brain. The nervous system constantly relays information
•newborn to six months:up to 75% of the total hemoglo- about the body’s temperature to the thermostat,which in
bin turn activates different physical responses designed to
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1313
Fever
cool or warm the body,depending on the circumstances. Fever is an important component of the immune
These responses include: decreasing or increasing the response,though its role is not completely understood.
flow of blood from the body’s core,where it is warmed, Physicians believe that an elevated body temperature has
to the surface,where it is cooled; slowing down or speed- several effects. The immune system chemicals that react
ing up the rate at which the body turns food into energy with the fever-inducing agent and trigger the resetting of
(metabolic rate); inducing shivering,which generates heat the thermostat also increase the production of cells that
through muscle contraction; and inducing sweating, fight off the invading bacteria or viruses. Higher temper-
which cools the body through evaporation. atures also inhibit the growth of some bacteria,while at
the same time speeding up the chemical reactions that
A fever occurs when the thermostat resets at a higher
help the body’s cells repair themselves. In addition,the
temperature, primarily in response to an infection. To
increased heart rate that may accompany the changes in
reach the higher temperature,the body moves blood to
blood circulation also speeds the arrival of white blood
the warmer interior, increases the metabolic rate, and
cells to the sites of infection.
induces shivering. The “chills”that often accompany a
fever are caused by the movement of blood to the body’s
core,leaving the surface and extremities cold. Once the
Causes and symptoms
higher temperature is achieved,the shivering and chills
stop. When the infection has been overcome or drugs Fevers are primarily caused by viral or bacterial
such as aspirinor acetaminophen(Tylenol) have been infections,such as pneumoniaor influenza. However,
taken, the thermostat resets to normal and the body’s other conditions can induce a fever, including allergic
cooling mechanisms switch on:the blood moves to the reactions; autoimmune diseases; trauma,such as breaking
surface and sweating occurs. a bone; cancer; excessive exposure to the sun; intense
1314 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
reveF
B.
A.
D.
G.
C.
F.
E.
A dramatic rise in body temperature often includes the following symptoms:A.Loss of fluid results in dehydration.B.The
hypothalamic set-point is increased,raising metabolism.C.Blood vessels in skin dilate.D.Sweat glands produce excess
perspiration.E.Increased pulse rate.F.Increased hypothalmic set-point may introduce chills and shivering to promote heat
production from muscles.G.Skin becomes more heat-sensitive.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
exercise; hormonal imbalances; certain drugs; and dam-
age to the hypothalamus. When an infection occurs, KEY TERMS
fever-inducing agents called pyrogens are released,either
by the body’s immune system or by the invading cells Antipyretic—A drug that lowers fever, like aspirin
themselves,that trigger the resetting of the thermostat. In or acetaminophen.
other circumstances,the immune system may overreact
Autoimmune disease—Condition in which a per-
(allergic reactions) or become damaged (autoimmune dis-
son’s immune system attacks the body’s own cells,
eases),causing the uncontrolled release of pyrogens. A
causing tissue destruction.
strokeor tumor can damage the hypothalamus,causing
the body’s thermostat to malfunction. Excessive exposure Febrile seizure—Convulsions brought on by fever.
to the sun or intensely exercising in hot weather can result Malignant hyperthermia—A rare, inherited condi-
in heat stroke, a condition in which the body’s cooling tion in which a person develops a very high fever
mechanisms fail. Malignant hyperthermia is a rare,inher- when given certain anesthetics or muscle relax-
ited condition in which a person develops a very high ants in preparation for surgery.
fever when given certain anesthetics or muscle relaxants
Meningitis—A potentially fatal inflammation of the
in preparation for surgery.
thin membrane covering the brain and spinal cord.
How long a fever lasts and how high it may go
Metabolism—The chemical process by which the
depends on several factors,including its cause,the age of
body turns food into energy, which can be given
the patient, and his or her overall health. Most fevers
off as heat.
caused by infections are acute,appearing suddenly and
then dissipating as the immune system defeats the infec- Pyrogen—A chemical circulating in the blood that
tious agent. An infectious fever may also rise and fall causes a rise in body temperature.
throughout the day, reaching its peek in the late after- Reye’s syndrome—A disorder principally affecting
noon or early evening. A low-grade fever that lasts for the liver and brain, marked by the rapid develop-
several weeks is associated with autoimmune diseases ment of life-threatening neurological symptoms.
such as lupus or with some cancers, particularly
leukemia and lymphoma.
may be ordered if the doctor cannot readily determine the
Diagnosis
cause of a fever.
A fever is usually diagnosed using a thermometer. A
variety of different thermometers are available,including
Treatment
traditional glass and mercury ones used for oral or rectal
temperature readings and more sophisticated electronic Physicians agree that the most effective treatment
ones that can be inserted in the ear to quickly register the for a fever is to address its underlying cause, such as
body’s temperature. For adults and older children,temper- through the administration of antibiotics. Also,because
ature readings are usually taken orally. Younger children a fever helps the immune system fight infection,it usual-
who cannot or will not hold a thermometer in their mouths ly should be allowed to run its course. Drugs to lower
can have their temperature taken by placing an oral ther- fever (antipyretics) can be given if a patient (particularly
mometer under their armpit. Infants generally have their a child) is uncomfortable. These include aspirin,aceta-
temperature taken rectally using a rectal thermometer. minophen (Tylenol), and ibuprofin (Advil). Aspirin,
however, should not be given to a child or adolescent
As important as registering a patient’s temperature is
with a fever since this drug has been linked to an
determining the underlying cause of the fever. The pres-
increased risk of Reye’s syndrome. Bathing a patient in
ence or absence of accompanying symptoms,a patient’s
cool water can also help alleviate a high fever.
medical history, and information about what he or she
may have ingested, any recent trips taken, or possible A fever requires emergency treatment under the fol-
exposures to illness help the physician make a diagnosis. lowing circumstances:
Blood tests can aid in identifying an infectious agent by
•newborn (three months or younger) with a fever over
detecting the presence of antibodies against it or provid-
100.5°F (38°C)
ing samples for growth of the organism in a culture.
•infant or child with a fever over 103°F (39.4°C)
Blood tests can also provide the doctor with white blood
cell counts. Ultrasound tests,magnetic resonance imag- •fever accompanied by severe headache,neck stiffness,
ing (MRI) tests, or computed tomography (CT) scans mental confusion,or severe swelling of the throat
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1315
Fever
A very high fever in a small child can trigger and characterized by intermittent fever,sweating,chills,
seizures (febrile seizures) and therefore should be treated aches, and mental depression. The test is also used to
immediately. A fever accompanied by the above symp- diagnose certain other infectious diseases:salmonellosis,
toms can indicate the presence of a serious infection, caused by Salmonellabacteria and marked by nausea and
such as meningitis,and should be brought to the imme- severe diarrhea; rickettsial infections, a group of dis-
diate attention of a physician. eases caused by the bacteria Rickettsia; and tularemia,
also called rabbit fever,a bacterial infection character-
ized by a high fever and swollen lymph nodes. The
Prognosis
febrile agglutinins test can also be used to confirm the
Most fevers caused by infection end as soon as the presence of two types of cancer, leukemia and lym-
immune system rids the body of the pathogen and do not phoma; however,doctors rarely use the test for this pur-
produce any lasting effects. The prognosis for fevers pose,since other diagnostic tests are more reliable.
associated with more chronic conditions,such as autoim-
mune disease,depends upon the overall outcome of the
Description
disorder.
A febrile agglutinins test can be performed at a doc-
tor’s office or a hospital. A nurse or technician will col-
Resources
lect a few drops of blood (about 7ml) in a small tube that
BOOKS has been cooled slightly. The specimen is then taken to a
Bennett,J. Claude,and Fred Plum,eds. Cecil Textbook of Med- laboratory where it heated and examined for clumping. If
icine.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996. the cells clump after warming and unclump as they cool,
Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed.
a febrile agglutinin titer (concentration) of greater than
Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1995.
1:80 is present.
Gelfand,Jeffrey. “Fever,Including Fever of Unknown Origin.”
In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Antho-
ny S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997. Normal results
The results of febrile agglutinins tests require a doc-
Bridget Travers
tor’s interpretation. In general,however,a normal value
is lower than 1:32.
Fever blister see Cold sore
Abnormal results
An value higher than 1:80 suggests a diagnosis for
brucellosis or one of the other conditions indicated by
this test.
Fever evaluation tests
Definition Jill S. Lasker
Fever evaluation tests, better known as febrile
agglutinins tests,are performed to detect the presence of
antibodies in the blood that are sensitive to temperature
changes. Antibodies are proteins produced by the
Fever of unknown origin
immune system in response to specific infectious agents,
such as viruses or bateria. Febrile agglutinins are anti-
Definition
bodies that cause red blood cells to clump,but only when
the blood is warmed to temperatures higher than the Feverof unknown origin (FUO) refers to the pres-
average body temperature of 98.6°F (37°C). ence of a documented fever for a specified time, for
which a cause has not been found after a basic medical
evaluation. The classic criteria developed in 1961 includ-
Purpose
ed:temperature greater than 101°F (38.3°C),for at least
The febrile agglutinins test is used to confirm the three weeks,and inability to find a cause after one week
diagonsis of certain infectious diseases that stimulate the of study. Within the past decade,a revision has been pro-
body to produce febrile agglutinins. The disease most posed that categorizes FUO into classic, hospital
commonly diagnosed by this test is brucellosis,a infec- acquired FUO, FUO associated with low white blood
tion caused by bacteria belonging to the genus Brucella counts,and HIV associated FUO (AIDSrelated).
1316 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stset
noitaulave
reveF
Description
KEY TERMS
Fever is a natural response of the body that helps in
fighting off foreign substances,such as microorganisms,
AIDS—Acquired immune deficiency syndrome is
toxins,etc. Body temperature is set by the thermoregula-
often represented by these initials. The disease is
tory center,located in an area in the brain called hypo-
associated with infection by the human immunod-
thalamus. Body temperature is not constant all day,but
eficiency virus (HIV), and has the main feature of
actually is lowest at 6 A.M.and highest around 4–6 P.M. In
repeated infections, due to failure of certain parts
addition, temperature varies in different regions of the
of the immune system. Infection by HIV damages
body; for example, rectal and urine temperatures are
part of the body’s natural immunity, and leads to
about one degree Fahrenheit higher than oral temperature
recurrent illnesses.
and rectal temperature is higher than urine. It is also
important to realize that certain normal conditions can Antibiotic—A medication that is designed to kill
effect body temperature,such as pregnancy,food inges- or weaken bacteria.
tion,age,and certain hormonal changes.
Computed tomography scan (CT Scan)—A spe-
Substances that cause fever are known as “pyro- cialized x-ray procedure in which cross-sections
gens.”There are two types of pyrogens; exogenous and of the area in question can be examined in detail.
endogenous. Those that originate outside the body,such This allows physicians to examine organs such as
as bacterial toxins, are called “exogenous” pyrogens. the pancreas, bile ducts, and others which are
Pyrogens formed by the body’s own cells in response to often the site of hidden infections.
an outside stimulus (such as a bacterial toxin) are called Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)—This is a
“endogenous”pyrogens. new technique similar to CT Scan, but based on
the magnetic properties of various areas of the
Researchers have discovered that there are several
body to compose images.
“endogenous” pyrogens. These are made up of small
groups of amino acids,the building blocks of proteins. NSAID—Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
These natural pyrogens have other functions in addition are medications such as aspirin and ibuprofen that
to inducing fever; they have been named “cytokines”. decrease pain and inflammation. Many can now
When cytokines are injected into humans, fever and be obtained without a doctor’s prescription.
chills develop within an hour. Interferon,tumor necrosis
Ultrasound—A non-invasive procedure based on
factor,and various interleukins are the major fever pro-
changes in sound waves of a frequency that can-
ducing cytokines.
not be heard, but respond to changes in tissue
The production of fever is a very complex process; composition. It is very useful for diagnosing dis-
somehow, these cytokines cause the thermoregulatory eases of the gallbladder, liver, and hidden infec-
center in the hypothalamus to reset the normal tempera- tions, such as abscesses.
ture level. The body’s initial response is to conserve heat
by vasoconstriction,a process in which blood vessels nar-
row and prevent heat loss from the skin and elsewhere.
This alone will raise temperature by two to three degrees. Causes and symptoms
Certain behavioral activities also occur,such as adding
The most frequent cause of FUO is still infection,
more clothes,seeking a warmer environment,etc. If the
though the percentage has decreased in recent years.
hypothalamus requires more heat,then shivering occurs.
Tuberculosis remains an important cause, especially
Fever is a body defense mechanism. It has been when it occurs outside the lungs. The decrease in infec-
shown that one of the effects of temperature increase is to tions as a cause of FUO is due in part to improved culture
slow bacterial growth. However, fever also has some techniques. In addition, technological advances have
downsides; the body’s metabolic rate is increased and made it easier to diagnose non-infectious causes. For
with it,oxygen consumption. This can have a devastating example,tumors and autoimmune diseases in particular
effect on those with poor circulation. In addition,fever are now easier to diagnose. (An autoimmune disease is
can lead to seizures in the very young. one that arises when the body tolerance for its own cell
antigenic cell markers disappears.)
When temperature elevation occurs for an extended
period of time and no cause is found, the term FUO is Allergiesto medications can also cause prolonged
then used. The far majority of these patients are eventual- fever; sometimes patients will have other symptoms sug-
ly found to have one of several diseases. gesting an allergic reaction,such as a rash.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1317
Fever
of
unknown
origin
There are many possible causes of FUO; generally The development of FUO in certain settings,such as
though,a diagnosis can be found. About 10% of patients that acquired by patients in the hospital or in those with a
will wind up without a definite cause,and about the same low white blood count, often needs rapid treatment to
percentage have “factitious fevers”(either self induced avoid serious complications. Therefore,in these instances
or no fever at all). patients may be placed on antibiotics after a minimal
number of diagnostic studies. Once test results are Some general symptoms tend to occur along with
known,treatment can be adjusted as needed.
fever; these are called constitutional symptoms and con-
sist of myalgias (muscle aches),chills,and headache.
Prognosis
Diagnosis The outlook for patients with FUO depends on the
cause of the fever. If the basic illness is easily treatable
Few symptoms in medicine present such a diagnos-
and can be found rather quickly,the potential for a cure
tic challenge as fever. Nonetheless,if a careful,logical,
is quite good. Some patients continue with temperature
and thorough evaluation is performed,a diagnosis will be
elevations for six months or more; if no serious disease is
found in most cases. The patient’s past medical history as
found,medications such as NSAIDs are used to decrease
well as travel,social,and family history should be care-
the effects of the fever. Careful follow-up and reevalua-
fully searched for important clues.
tion is recommended in these cases.
Usually the first step is to search for an infectious
cause. Skin and other screening tests for diseases such as
Resources
tuberculosis,and examination of blood,urine,and stool,
are generally indicated. Antibody levels to a number of BOOKS
infectious agents can be measured; if these are rising, Gelfand,Jeffrey A.,and Charles A. Dinarello. “Fever of
they may point to an active infection. Unknown Origin.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:
Various x-ray studies are also of value. In addition to
McGraw-Hill,1997.
standard examinations, recently developed radiological
techniques using ultrasound,computed tomography scan PERIODICALS
(CT scan) and magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) scans McCarthy,Paul L. “Infants with Fever.”New England Journal
are now available. These enable physicians to examine of Medicine329,no. 20 (1993):1493.
areas that were once accessible only through surgery. Fur-
OTHER
thermore,new studies using radioactive materials (nuclear
“Bone Marrow Biopsy in the Diagnosis of Fever of Unknown
medicine),can detect areas of infection and inflammation Origin in Patients With Acquired Immunodeficiency Syn-
previously almost impossible to find,even with surgery. drome.’”“Long-term Follow-up of Patients With Undiag-
nosed Fever of Unknown Origin,”“Utility of Scintigraph-
Biopsies of any suspicious areas found on an x-ray
ic Methods in Patients With Fever of Unknown Origin.”
exam can be performed by either traditional or newer
Journal of the Medical Association.<http://pubs.
surgical techniques. Material obtained by biopsy is then
ama-assn.org>.
examined by a pathologist to look for clues as to the
cause of the fever. Evidence of infection,tumor or other
David Kaminstein,MD
diseases can be found in this way. Portions of the biopsy
are also sent to the laboratory for culture in an attempt to
Fiber-modified diet see Diets
grow and identify an infectious organism.
Fibrin degradation products see Fibrin split
Patients with HIV are an especially difficult prob-
products
lem,as they often suffer from many unusual infections.
HIV itself is a potential cause of fever.
Treatment
Most patients who undergo evaluation for FUO do not
Fibrin split products
receive treatment until a clear-cut cause is found. Antibi-
oticsor medications designed to suppress a fever (such as
Definition
NSAIDs) will only hide the true cause. Once physicians are
satisfied that there is no infectious cause,they may use med- Fibrin split products (FSP) are fragments of protein
ications such as NSAIDs,or corticosteroidsto decrease released from a dissolving clot. The fibrin split products
inflammation and diminish constitutional symptoms. test is one of several tests done to evaluate a person with
1318 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stcudorp
tilps
nirbiF
blood clotting problems (coagulation),particularly dis-
seminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). KEY TERMS
Purpose Coagulation—The entire process of blood clotting.
Coagulation cascade—A sequence of biochemical
High levels of FSP in a person’s blood are associated
activities to stop bleeding by forming a clot.
with DIC, a serious medical condition that develops
when the normal balance between bleeding and clotting Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)—A
is disturbed. Excessive bleeding and clotting injures serious medical condition that develops when the
body organs,and causes anemia or death. normal balance between bleeding and clotting is
disturbed. Excessive bleeding and clotting injures
body organs, and causes anemia or death.
Description
Fibrin split products (FSP)—Pieces of the protein
Coagulation begins typically with an injury to some
fibrin released from a dissolving clot.
part of the body. The injury sets in motion a cascade of
Fibrinolysis—The clot dissolving portion of the
biochemical activities (the coagulation cascade) to stop
coagulation process.
the bleeding, by forming a clot from a mixture of the
blood protein fibrin and platelets. Titer—A dilution of a substance with an exact
known amount of fluid. For example, one part of
Once bleeding is stopped,another blood protein dis-
serum diluted with four parts of saline is a titer
solves the clot by breaking down the fibrin into frag-
of 1:4.
ments. Measurement of these fragments gives informa-
tion about the clot dissolving portion of coagulation,
called fibrinolysis.
In DIC, the coagulation cascade is triggered in an
locates a vein in the inner elbow region, and inserts a
abnormal way. A blood infection,a transfusionreaction,
needle into that vein. Vacuum action draws the blood
a large amount of tissue damage,such as a burn,a dead
through the needle into an attached tube. Collection of
fetus,and some cancers can begin the chain of biochemi-
the sample takes only a few minutes.
cal events leading to blood clots. The coagulation cas-
cade becomes overwhelmed with excessive clotting fol-
lowed by excessive bleeding. As the large number of Aftercare
clots dissolve, fibrin split products accumulate in the
Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture site.
blood and encourage even more bleeding.
Pressure applied to the puncture site until the bleeding
Laboratory tests for FSP are done on the yellow liq- stops reduces bruising. Warm packs to the puncture site
uid portion left over after blood clots (serum). A person’s relieve discomfort. The patient may feel dizzy or faint.
serum is mixed with a substance that binds to FSP. This
bound complex is measured,and the original amount of
Risks
FSP is determined. Some test methods give an actual
measurement of FSP; some give a titer, or dilution. People with coagulation problems may bleed longer
Methods that provide a titer look for the presence or than normal. The healthcare provider must make sure
absence of FSP. If the serum is positive for FSP, the bleeding has stopped before leaving the patient unattended.
serum is diluted, or titered, and the test is done again.
These steps are repeated until the serum is so dilute that
Normal results
it no longer gives a positive result. The last dilution that
gives a positive result is the titer reported.
Negative at a less than or equal to 1:4 dilution or less
The FSP test is covered by insurance when medical- than 10 g/mL.
ly necessary. Results are usually available within one to
two hours. Other names for this test are fibrin degrada-
Abnormal results
tion products,fibrin breakdown products,or FDP.
High levels of FSP indicate DIC. Results of the test
must be interpreted by the physician according to the
Preparation
person’s clinical symptoms and medical history. Other
This test requires 0.17 oz (5 ml) of blood. A health- conditions that increase blood clotting activity also
care worker ties a tourniquet on the patient’s upper arm, increase FSP: venous thrombosis, surgery and trans-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1319
Fibrin
split
products
plants,blood clots in the lung,certain cancers,and heart
attack(myocardial infarction). KEY TERMS
Resources Fibrin—The last step in the coagulation process.
Fibrin forms strands that add bulk to a forming
BOOKS
blood clot to hold it in place and help “plug” an
Miller,Jonathan L. “Blood Coagulation and Fibrinolysis.”In
injured blood vessel wall.
Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Meth-
ods.19th ed. Ed. John B. Henry. Philadelphia:W. B. Platelet—An irregularly shaped cell-like particle
Saunders Co.,1996. in the blood that is an important part of blood
PERIODICALS clotting. Platelets are activated when an injury
Hardaway,Robert M.,and Charles H. Williams. “Disseminated causes a blood vessel to break. They change shape
Intravascular Coagulation:An Update.”Comprehensive from round to spiny, “sticking” to the broken ves-
Therapy(Nov. 1996):737-743. sel wall and to each other to begin the clotting
process.
Nancy J. Nordenson
Prothrombin—A type of protein called a glyco-
protein that is converted to thrombin during the
clotting process.
Thrombin—An enzyme that converts fibrinogen
into strands of fibrin.
Fibrinogen test
Definition
Fibrinogen (Factor I) is a protein that originates in
The conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin is the last step
the liver. It is converted to fibrin during the blood-clot-
of the “coagulation cascade,”a series of reactions in the
ting process (coagulation).
blood triggered by tissue injury and platelet activation.
With each step in the cascade,a coagulation factor in the
Purpose blood is converted from an inactive to an active form.
The active form of the factor then activates several mole-
The fibrinogen test aids in the diagnosis of suspected
cules of the next factor in the series,and so on,until the
clotting or bleeding disorders caused by fibrinogen
final step,when fibrinogen is converted into fibrin.
abnormalities.
The factors involved in the coagulation cascade are
Precautions numbered I,II,and V through XIII. Factor I is fibrino-
gen,while factor II (fibrinogen’s immediate precursor) is
This test is not recommended for patients with active
called prothrombin. Most of the coagulation factors are
bleeding,acute infection or illness,or in those patients
made in the liver,which needs an adequate supply of vit-
who have received blood transfusions within four weeks.
amin K to manufacture the different clotting factors.
Drugs that may increase fibrinogen levels include
When fibrinogen acts as an “acute-phase reactant,”it
estrogens and oral contraceptives. Drugs that may cause
rises sharply during tissue inflammation or injury. When
decreased levels include anabolic steroids, androgens,
this occurs,high fibrinogen levels may be a predictor for
phenobarbital,urokinase,streptokinase,and valproic acid.
an increased risk of heart or circulatory disease. Other
conditions in which fibrinogen is elevated are cancers of
Description
the stomach,breast,or kidney,and inflammatory disor-
Fibrinogen plays two essential roles in the body:it is ders like rheumatoid arthritis.
a protein called an acute-phase reactant that becomes ele-
Reduced fibrinogen levels can be found in liver dis-
vated with tissue inflammation or tissue destruction,and
ease, prostate cancer, lung disease, bone marrow
it is also a vital part of the “common pathway” of the
lesions,malnourishment,and certain bleeding disorders.
coagulation process.
The low levels can be used to evaluate disseminated
In order for blood to clot,fibrinogen must be con- intravascular coagulation (DIS),a serious medical condi-
verted to fibrin by the action of an enzyme called throm- tion that develops when there is a disturbed balance
bin. Fibrin molecules clump together to form long fila- between bleeding and clotting. Other conditions related
ments,which trap blood cells to form a solid clot. to decreased fibrinogen levels are those in which fibrino-
1320 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tset
negonirbiF
gen is completely absent (congenital afibrinogenemia),
conditions in which levels are low (hypofibrinogenemia), Fibroadenoma
and conditions of abnormal fibrinogen (dysfibrinogene-
Definition
mia). Obstetric complications or trauma may also cause
low levels. Large-volume blood transfusions cause low Fibroadenomas are benign breast tumors commonly
levels because banked blood does not contain fibrinogen. found in young women. Fibroadenoma means “a tumor
composed of glandular (related to gland) and fibrous
(containing fibers) tissues.”
Preparation
This test is performed with a blood sample,which Description
can be drawn at any time of day. The patient does not Breast fibroadenomas,abnormal growths of glandu-
have to be fasting(nothing to eat or drink). lar and fibrous tissues, are most common between the
ages of 15 and 30,and are found in 10% of all women
(20% of African-American women). They are found
Aftercare
rarely in postmenopausal women.
Because a fibrinogen test is often ordered when a
Described as feeling like marbles,these firm,round,
bleeding disorder is suspected,the patient should apply
movable,and “rubbery”lumps range from 1–5 cm in size.
pressure or a pressure dressing to the blood-drawn site
Giant fibroadenomas are larger,lemon-sized lumps. Usually
site for a period of time after blood is drawn,and then
single,from 10–15% of women have more than one.
reexamine the site for bleeding.
While some types of breast lumps come and go dur-
ing the menstrual cycle,fibroadenomas typically do not
Risks
disappear after a woman’s period,and should be checked
by a doctor.
Risks for this test are minimal,but may include slight
bleeding from the blood-drawing site,faintingor feeling
lightheaded after procedure,or the seeing the accumula- Causes and symptoms
tion of blood under the puncture site (hematoma). The cause of breast fibroadenomas is unknown.
They may be dependent upon estrogen,because they are
common in premenopausal women,can be found in post-
Normal results
menopausal women taking estrogen, and because they
Normal reference ranges are laboratory-specific,but grow larger in pregnant women.
are usually within the following:
Fibroadenomas usually cause no symptoms and may
•adult:200 mg/dL–400 mg/dL be discovered during breast self-examination,or during
a routine check-up.
•newborn:125 mg/dL–300 mg/dL
Diagnosis
Abnormal results
When the doctor takes a complete medical history,
Spontaneous bleeding can occur with values less they will ask when the lump was first noticed, if there
than 100 mg/dL. were any symptoms or changes in lump size,and if there
is any personal or family history of breast disease.
Resources The doctor thoroughly feels the breasts (palpates).
Tests are done, usually including mammography or
BOOKS
ultrasound scans, or surgical removal of cells or tissue
Cahill,Mathew. Handbook of Diagnostic Tests.Springhouse,
for examination under a the microscope (biopsy).
PA:Springhouse Corporation,1995.
Jacobs,David S.,et al. Laboratory Test Handbook.4th ed. New Diagnostic tests include:
York:Lexi-Comp Inc.,1996.
•Mammogram. An x-ray examination of the breast.
Pagana,Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis:Mosby,Inc.,1998. •Ultrasound scan. A technique that uses sound waves to
display a two-dimensional image of the breast,showing
Janis O. Flores whether a lump is solid or fluid-filled (cystic).
•Fine-needle aspiration biopsy. A minor procedure
Fibrocystic breast disease see Fibrocystic
wherein fluid or cells are drawn out of the lump through
condition of the breast a small needle (aspirated).
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1321
Fibroadenoma
Prevention
KEY TERMS
Breast fibroadenomas cannot be prevented. They can
be discovered early by regular breast self-examination.
Aspiration —To withdraw material with a needle
and syringe.
Resources
Biopsy —To remove cells or tissue for microscopic
BOOKS
examination.
Giuliano,Armando E. “Breast:Fibroadenoma of the Breast.”
Estrogen—Female sex hormone produced by the In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th
ovaries. ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton &
Lange,1995.
Hacker,Neville F. “Breast Disease:A Gynecologic Perspective.”
In Essentials of Obstetrics and Gynecology,ed. Neville F.
•Core biopsy. A procedure wherein a larger piece of tis-
Hacker,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1992.
sue is withdrawn from the lump through a larger needle.
“Breast Problems. Soothing Tactics for Pain,Tenderness,and
•Incisional biopsy. A surgical procedure wherein a piece Worry.”In New Choices in Natural Healing,ed. Bill Got-
of the lump is removed through an cut (incision). tlieb,et al. Emmaus,PA:Rodale Press,1995.
Love,Susan M.,and Karen Lindsay. “Lumps and Lumpiness.”
•Excisional biopsy. A surgical procedure wherein the In Dr. Susan Love’s Breast Book.Reading,MA:Addison-
entire lump is removed through an cut (incision). Wesley Publishing Co.,1995.
Rosenthal,M. Sara. “Is It Cancer?”In The Breast Sourcebook:
Most insurance plans cover the costs of diagnosing
Everything You Need to Know About Breast Cancer
and treating fibroadenomas.
Detection,Treatment,and Prevention.Los Angeles:Low-
ell House,1996.
Treatment
PERIODICALS
Performed usually in outpatient settings, breast Deckers,Peter J.,and Andrew Ricci Jr. “Pain and Lumps in the
fibroadenomas are removed by lumpectomy,or surgi- Female Breast.”Hospital Practice28 (Feb. 1992):67-73,
77-78,87-94.
cal excision under local or general anesthesia. Some-
Delaney,Lisa. “Breast Protection At Your Fingertips.”Preven-
times lumps in younger women are not removed but are
tion Magazine,July 1994,81-83,86-87,137.
monitored by self-examination, yearly doctor check-
Donegan,William L. “Evaluation of a Palpable Breast Mass.”
ups, and mammograms. Surgery is generally recom-
The New England Journal of Medicine24 (Sept. 1992):
mended for women over 30, and for lumps that are
937-942.
painful or enlarging. Dupont,William,D.,David L. Page,and Fritz F. Parl. “Long-
Term Risk of Breast Cancer in Women with Fibroadenoma.”
The New England Journal of Medicine7 (July 1994):10-15.
Alternative treatments
Glaser,Vicki. “Benign Breast Disorders.”Patient Care14 (Apr.
Alternative treatments for breast fibroadenomas 1997):140-151.
include a low-fat, high-fiber, vegetarian-type diet; a
ORGANIZATIONS
reduction in caffeine intake; supplementation with
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 409
evening primrose oil (Oenothera biennis), flax oil, or
12th Street,S.W.,PO Box 96920
fish oil and vitaminsE and C; and the application of hot
compresses to the breast. In addition, a focus on liver Mercedes McLaughlin
cleansing is important to assist the body in conjugation
and elimination of excess estrogens. Botanical remedies
can be useful in hormone balancing, as can acupunc-
tureand homeopathy. Massaging the breasts with cas-
tor oil, straight or infused with herbs or essential oils,
Fibrocystic condition of
can help fibroadenomas reduce and dissipate,as well as
the breast
keep women in touch with changes in their breast tissue.
Definition
Prognosis
Fibrocystic condition of the breast is a term that may
Breast fibroadenomas are not cancerous. The lumps refer to a variety of symptoms:breast lumpiness or ten-
recur in up to 20% of women. A small number of lumps derness, microscopic breast tissue, and/or the x ray or
disappear on their own. ultrasound picture of the breast. It has been called a
1322 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tsaerb
eht
fo
noitidnoc
citsycorbiF
“wastebasket”diagnosis because a wide range of vaguely women encounter just before or during their menstrual
defined benign breast conditions may be labeled as fibro- periods. At this time,female hormones are preparing the
cystic condition. It is not a cancer,and the majority of breasts for pregnancy,by stimulating the milk-produc-
types of fibrocystic conditions do not increase the risk of ing cells,and storing fluid. Each breast may contain as
breast cancer. much as three to six teaspoons of excess fluid. Swelling,
with increased sensitivity or pain, may result. If preg-
nancy does not occur,the body reabsorbs the fluid,and
Description
the engorgement and discomfort are relieved.
There is no such thing as a normal or typical female
Symptoms of fibrocystic breast condition range
breast. Breasts come in all shapes and sizes,with varying
from mildly annoying in some women to extremely
textures from smooth to extremely lumpy. The tissues of painful in others. The severity of discomfort may vary
the female breast change in response to hormone levels,
from month to month in the same woman. Although
normal aging,nursing (lactation),weight fluctuations,
sometimes distressing,this experience is the body’s nor-
and injury. To further complicate matters,the breast has
mal response to routine hormonal changes.
several types of tissue; each of these tissue types may
This cycle of breast sensitivity,pain and/or enlarge-
respond differently to changes in body chemistry.
ment,can also result from medications. Some hormone
Fibrocystic breast condition may be called fibrocystic
replacement therapies (estrogen and progesterone) used
disease,although it is clearly not a single,specific disease
for postmenopausal women can produce these effects.
process. Variations or changes in the way the breast feels or
Other medications,primarily,but not exclusively those
looks on x ray may cause the condition to be called “fibro-
with hormones may also provoke these symptoms.
cystic change.”Other names have been used to refer to this
Breast pain unrelated to hormone shifts is called
imprecise and ill-defined term: mammary dysplasia,
“noncyclic” pain. “Trigger-zone breast pain” is a term
mastopathy,chronic cystic mastitis,indurative mastopathy,
that may also be used to describe this area-specific pain.
mastalgia,lumpy breasts,or physiologic nodularity.
This type of pain may be continuous, or it may be felt
Estimates vary,but 40–90% of all women have some
intermittently. Trauma,such as a blow to the chest area,a
evidence of “fibrocystic”condition,change,or disease. It
prior breast biopsy,or sensitivity to certain medications
is most common among women between the ages 30 and
may also underlie this type of pain. Fibrocystic condition
50,but may be seen at other ages.
of the breast may be cited as the cause of otherwise unex-
plained breast pain.
Causes and symptoms Lumps,apart from those clearly associated with hor-
mone cycles, may also be placed under the heading of
Fibrocystic condition of the breast refers to technical
fibrocystic condition. These lumps stand out from enlarged
findings on diagnostic testing (signs); however,this dis-
general breast tissue. Although noncancerous lumps may
cussion focuses on symptoms that may fall under the
occur,the obvious concern with such lumps is cancer.
general category of the fibrocystic condition. First, a
brief review of the structure and function of the breast Noncancerous breast lumps include:
may be useful.
•Adenosis. This condition refers to the enlargement of
The breast is not supposed to be a soft,smooth organ. breast lobules,which contain a greater number of glands
It is actually a type of sweat gland. Milk,the breasts’ver- than usual. If a group of lobules are found near each
sion of sweat,is secreted when the breast receives appro- other,the affected area may be large enough to be felt.
priate hormonal and environmental stimulation.
•Cysts. These are fluid-filled sacs in the breast and proba-
The normal breast contains milk glands,with their bly develop as ducts that become clogged with old cells
accompanying ducts, or pipelines, for transporting the in the process of normal emptying and filling. Cysts usu-
milk. These complex structures may not only alter in size, ally feel soft and round or oval. However a cyst deep
but can increase or decrease in number as needed. Fibrous within the breast may feel hard,as it pushes up against
connective tissue,fatty tissue,nerves,blood and lymph firmer breast tissue. A woman with a cyst may experi-
vessels,and lymph nodes,with their different shapes and ence pain, especially if it increases in size before her
textures,lie among the ever-changing milk glands. It is no menstrual cycle,as is often the case. Women between the
wonder that a woman’s breasts may not feel uniform in age of 30 and 50 are most likely to develop cysts.
texture and that the “lumpiness”may wax and wane.
•Epithelial hyperplasia. Also called proliferative breast
The fibrocystic condition refers to the tenderness, disease,this condition refers to an overgrowth of cells
enlargement, and/or changing “lumpiness” that many lining either the ducts or the lobules.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1323
Fibrocystic
condition
of
the
breast
the risk of developing breast cancer is increased. (One
study with over 3,000 female participants indicated that
about 20% of the participants with atypical hyperplasia
and a family history of breast cancer developed breast
cancer,as compared to the 8% of participants who devel-
oped the disease with atypical hyperplasia and no family
history of breast cancer.) For women with ADH and a
family history of breast cancer,more frequent mammo-
grams and closer monitoring may be required.
Diagnosis
Breast cancer is the most common concern of
women who feel a breast lump or experience an abnor-
mal breast symptom. For peace of mind,and to rule out
any possibility of cancer, any newly discovered breast
lumps should be brought to the attention of a family
physician or an obstetrician-gynecologist. He or she will
obtain a history and conduct thorough physical exami-
nationof the area. Depending on the findings on physi-
cal examination,the patient is usually referred for tests.
The most common of these tests include:
•Mammography. A mammogram is an x-ray examina-
tion of the breasts. The two major types of abnormali-
•Fibroadenomas. These are tumors that form in the tis-
ties doctors look for are masses and calcifications;
sues outside the milk ducts. The cause of fibroadeno-
either abnormality may be benign or malignant. The
mas is unknown. They generally feel smooth and firm,
size, shape, and edges of these masses help doctors
with a somewhat rubber-like texture. Typically a
determine whether or not cancer is present. Sometimes,
fibroadenomais not attached to surrounding tissue and
however,this test may be difficult to interpret,however,
moves slightly when touched. They are most common-
due to dense breast tissue.
ly found in adolescents and women in their early twen-
•Ultrasonography. If a suspicious lump is detected during
ties but can occur at any age.
mammography,an ultrasound (the use of high-frequen-
•Fibrosis. Sometimes one area of breast tissue persistently
cy sound waves to outline the shape of various organs
feels thicker or more prominent than the rest of the breast.
and tissues in the body) is useful (although not defini-
This feeling may be caused by old hardened scar tissue
tive) in distinguishing benign from cancerous growths.
and/or dead fat tissue as a result of surgery or trauma.
•Ductography. A ductogram (also called a galactogram)
Often the cause of this type of breast tissue is unknown.
is a test that is sometimes useful in evaluating nipple
•Miscellaneous disorders. A number of other benign
discharge. A very fine tube is threaded into the opening
(noncancerous) breast problems may be placed under
of the duct onto the nipple. A small amount of dye is
the heading of “fibrocystic condition.”These problems
injected,outlining the shape of the duct on an x ray,and
include disorders that may lead to breast inflammation
indicates whether or not there is a mass in the duct.
(mastitis),infection,and/or nipple discharge.
•Biopsy. If a lump cannot be proven benign by mammog-
raphy and ultrasound,a breast biopsy may be considered.
Atypical ductal hyperplasia
Usually a tissue sample is removed through a needle
The condition known as atypical ductal hyperplasia (fine-needle aspiration biopsy, or FNAB) to obtain a
(ADH) is a condition in which the cells lining the milk sample of the lump. The sample is examined under the
ducts of the breast are growing abnormally. This condi- microscope by a pathologist, and a detailed diagnosis
tion may appear as spots of calcium salts,or calcifica- regarding the type of benign lesion or cancer is estab-
tions,on the mammogram. A biopsy removed from the lished. In some cases,however,FNAB may not provide a
breast would confirm the diagnosis. Atypical ductal clear diagnosis, and another type of biopsy (such as a
hyperplasia is not a cancer. In most women,this condi- surgical biopsy,core-needle biopsy,or other stereotactic
tion will cause no problems. However,for some women, biopsy methods—such as the Mammotome or Advanced
especially women with family histories of breast cancer, Breast Biopsy Instrument) may be required.
1324 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tsaerb
eht
fo
noitidnoc
citsycorbiF
A mammogram of a female breast indicating multiple cysts.
(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Other breast conditions such as inflammation or may reduce the risk of developing fibrocystic condition
infection are usually recognized on the basis of suspi- of the breast. Evening primrose oil (Oenothera biennis),
cious history,breastfeeding,or characteristic symptoms flaxseed oil,and fish oils have been reported to be effec-
such as pain,redness,and swelling. A positive response tive in relieving cyclic breast pain for some women.
to appropriate therapies often confirms the diagnosis.
Prognosis
Treatment Most benign breast conditions carry no increased
risk for the development of breast cancer. However, a
Once a specific disorder within the broad category
small percentage of biopsies uncover overgrowth of tis-
of fibrocystic condition is identified, treatment can be
sue in a particular pattern in some women; this pattern
prescribed. There are a number of treatment options for
indicates a 15–20% increased risk of breast cancer over
women with a lump that has been diagnosed as benign. If
the next 20 years. Strict attention to early detection mea-
it is not causing a great deal of pain,the growth may be
sures,such as annual mammograms,is especially impor-
left in the breast. However,some women may choose to
tant for these women.
have a lump such as a fibroadenoma surgically removed,
especially if it is large. Another option to relieve the dis-
Prevention
comfort of a painful benign lump is to have the cyst suc-
tioned,or drained. If there is any uncertainty regarding There is no proven method of preventing the various
diagnosis,the fluid may be sent to the lab for analysis. manifestations of fibrocystic condition from occurring.
Some alternative health care practitioners believe that
Symptoms of cycle breast sensitivity and engorge-
eliminating foods high in methyl xanthines (primarily
ment may also be treated with diet,medication,and/or
coffee and chocolate) can decrease or reverse fibrocystic
physical modifications. For example,
breast changes.
•Although there is no scientific data to support this
claim,many women have reported relief of symptoms Resources
when caffeine was reduced or eliminated from their
BOOKS
diets. Decreasing salt before and during the period
Goldmann,David R.,and David A. Horowitz,eds. The Ameri-
when breasts are most sensitive may also ease swelling
can College of Physicians Home Medical Guide:Breast
and discomfort. Low-fat diets and elimination of dairy Problems.New York:Dorling Kindersley,2000.
products also appear to decrease soreness for some Kneece,Judy C. Finding a Lump In Your Breast.Columbia,
women. However,it may take several months to realize SC:EduCare Publishing,1996.
the effects of these various treatments. Love,Susan M.,with Karen Lindsey. Dr. Susan Love’s Breast
Book,3rd rev. ed.Reading,MA.:Addison-Wesley,2000.
•Over-the-counter analgesicssuch as acetaminophen
Singer,Sydney Ross. Get It Off! Understanding the Cause of
(Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Advil) may be recommended.
Breast Pain,Cysts,and Cancer.Pahoa,HI:ISCD Press,
In some cases,treatment with prescription drugs such
2000.
as hormones or hormone blockers may prove success-
PERIODICALS
ful. Oral contraceptivesmay also be prescribed.
“Benign Conditions.”Harvard Women’s Health Watch 5 (May
•Warm soaks or ice packs may provide comfort. A well- 1998):4-5.
fitted support bra can minimize physical movement and Duijm,Lucien E.M.,et al. “Value of Breast Imaging in Women
do much to relieve breast discomfort. Breast massage With Painful Breasts:Observational Follow Up Study.”
may promote removal of excess fluid from tissues and British Medical Journal317 (Nov. 1998):1492-1495.
alleviate symptoms. Massaging the breast with castor Horner,N.K. and J.W. Lampe. “Potential Mechanisms of Diet
oil,straight or infused with herbs or essential oils,can Therapy for Fibrocystic Breast Conditions Show Inade-
quate Evidence of Effectiveness.”Journal of the American
help reduce and dissipate fibroadenomas as well as keep
Dietetic Association100 (Nov. 2000):1368-1380.
women in touch with changes in their breast tissue.
Mannello,F.,M. Malatesta,and G. Gazzanelli. “Breast Cancer
•Infections are often treated with warm compresses and in Women With Palpable Breast Cysts.”Lancet354 (Aug.
antibiotics. Lactating women are encouraged to contin- 1999):677- 678.
ue breastfeeding because it promotes drainage and Morrow,Monica. “The Evaluation of Common Breast Prob-
healing. However,a serious infection may progress to lems.”American Family Physician61 (15 Apr. 2000):
form an abscessthat may need surgical drainage. 2371-2378,2385.
Page,D. L.,and W. D. Dupont. “Premalignant Conditions and
•Some studies of alternative or complementary treat-
Markers of Elevated Risk in the Breast and Their Manage-
ments,although controversial,have indicated that vita- ment.”Surgical Clinics of North America70,no. 4 (Aug.
mins A, B complex and E, and mineral supplements 1990):831-51.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1325
Fibrocystic
condition
of
the
breast
terize these conditions. Fibrositis, fibromyalgia, and
KEY TERMS fibromyositis are names given to a set of symptoms
believed to be caused by the same general problem.
Advanced Breast Biopsy Instrument (ABBI)—
Uses a rotating circular knife and thin heated elec-
Description
trical wire to remove a large cylinder of abnormal
breast tissue. Fibromyalgia is more common than previously
thought,with as many as 3–6% of the population affect-
Lobules—A small lobe or subdivision of a lobe
ed by the disorder. Fibromyalgia is more prevalent in
(often on a gland) that may be seen on the surface
adults than children, with more women affected than
of the gland by bumps or bulges.
men,particularly women of childbearing age.
Lymph nodes—Rounded, encapsulated bodies
consisting of an accumulation of lymphatic tissue.
Causes and symptoms
Mammotome—A method for removing breast
biopsies using suction to draw tissue into an open- The exact cause of fibromyalgia is not known.
ing in the side of a cylinder inserted into the breast Sometimes it occurs in several members of a family,
tissue. A rotating knife then cuts tissue samples suggesting that it may be an inherited disorder. People
from the rest of the breast; also known as a vacu- with fibromyalgia are most likely to complain of three
um-assisted biopsy primary symptoms:muscle and joint pain,stiffness,and
fatigue.
Stereotactic biopsy—A biopsy taken by precisely
locating areas of abnormal growth through the use Pain is the major symptom with aches,tenderness,
of delicate instruments. and stiffness of multiple muscles,joints,and soft tissues.
The pain also tends to move from one part of the body to
another. It is most common in the neck,shoulders,chest,
arms,legs,hips,and back. Although the pain is present
ORGANIZATIONS most of the time and may last for years,the severity of
American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Rd. NE,Atlanta,GA the pain is changeable and dependent on individual
30329. (800) ACS-2345 <http://www.cancer.org>. patient perception.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 409
Symptoms of fatigue may result from the individ-
12th St.,S.W.,P.O. Box 96920,Washington,DC 20090-
ual’s chronic pain coupled with anxietyabout the prob-
6920. <http://www.acog.org>.
Cancer Information Service (CIS). 9000 Rockville Pike,Build- lem and how to find relief. The inflammatory process
ing 31,Suite 10A18,Bethesda,MD 20892. (800) 4-CAN- also produces chemicals that are known to cause fatigue.
CER. Other common symptoms are tension headaches,diffi-
culty swallowing,recurrent abdominal pain,diarrhea,
OTHER
and numbness or tingling of the extremities. Stress,anxi-
National Cancer Institute. Understanding Breast Changes:A
ety,depression,or lack of sleep can increase symptoms.
Health Guide for All Women.10 July 2001 <http://rex.nci.
Intensity of symptoms is variable ranging from gradual
nih.gov/MAMMOG_WEB/PUBS_POSTERS/UNDRST-
improvement to episodes of recurrent symptoms.
NDNG/UNDER_STANDING_CHANGE.html>.
Ellen S. S. Weber
Diagnosis
Genevieve Slomski,Ph.D.
Diagnosis is difficult and frequently missed because
Fibroids see Uterine fibroids symptoms of fibromyalgia are vague and generalized.
Coexisting nerve and muscle disorders such as rheuma-
toid arthritis,spinal arthritis,or Lyme diseasemay fur-
ther complicate the diagnostic process. Presently,there are
no tests available to specifically diagnose fibromyalgia.
Fibromyalgia The diagnosis is usually made after ruling out other med-
ical conditions with similar symptoms.
Definition
Because of the emotional distress experienced by
Fibromyalgia is described as inflammation of the people with this condition and the influence of stress on
fibrous or connective tissue of the body. Widespread the symptoms themselves,fibromyalgia has often been
muscle pain,fatigue,and multiple tender points charac- labeled a psychological problem. Recognition of the
1326 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aiglaymorbiF
underlying inflammatory process involved in fibromyal-
gia has helped promote the validity of this disease. KEY TERMS
In 1990, the America College of Rheumatology
developed standards for fibromyalgia that health care Connective tissue—Tissue that supports and binds
practitioners can use to diagnose this condition. Accord- other body tissue and parts.
ing to these standards, a person is thought to have Lyme disease —An acute recurrent inflammatory
fibromyalgia if he or she has widespread pain in combi- disease involving one or a few joints, believed to
nation with tenderness in at least 11 of the 18 sites be transmitted by a tickborne virus. The condition
known as trigger points. Trigger point sites include the was originally described in the community of
base of the neck,along the backbone,in front of the hip Lyme, Connecticut, but has also been reported in
and elbow,and at the rear of the knee and shoulder. other parts of the United States and other coun-
tries. Knees, other large joints are most commonly
Treatment involved with local inflammation and swelling.
Rheumatology—The study of disorders character-
There is no known cure for fibromyalgia. Therefore,
ized by inflammation, degeneration of connective
the goal of treatment is successful symptom manage-
tissue, and related structures of the body. These
ment. Treatment usually requires a combination of thera-
disorders are sometimes collectively referred to as
pies, exercise, proper rest, and diet. A patient’s clear
rheumatism.
understanding of his or her role in the recovery process is
imperative for successful management of this condition.
Treatments found to be helpful include heat and occa-
sionally cold applications. A regular stretching program is cific attention to mental health,including psychological
often useful. Aerobic activities focusing on increasing the consultation, may also be important, since depression
heart rate are the preferred forms of exercise over most may precede or accompany fibromyalgia. Other alterna-
other forms of exertion. Exercise programs need to include tive therapies, including hellerwork, rolfing, homeo-
good warm-up and cool-down sessions,with special atten- pathic medicine, Chinese traditional medicine (both
tion given to avoiding exercises causing joint pain. The acupunctureand herbs),polarity therapy,and Western
diet should include a large variety of fruits and vegetables botanical medicine,can assist the person with fibromyal-
which provide the body with trace elements and minerals gia to function day to day and can contribute to healing.
that are necessary for healthy muscles.
Adequate rest is essential in the treatment of Prognosis
fibromyalgia. Avoidance of stimulating foods or drinks Fibromyalgia is a chronic problem. The symptoms
(such as coffee) and medications like decongestants sometimes improve and at other times worsen,but they
prior to bedtime is advised. If diet, exercise, and ade- often continue for months to years.
quate rest do not relieve the symptoms of fibromyalgia,
medications may be prescribed. Medications prescribed Prevention
and found to have some benefit include antidepressant
There is no known or specific way to prevent
drugs,muscle relaxants,and anti-inflammatory drugs.
fibromyalgia. However, similar to many other medical
People with fibromyalgia often need a rheumatology conditions,remaining as healthy as possible with a good
consultation (a meeting with a doctor who specializes in diet,safe exercise,and adequate rest is the best prevention.
disorders of the joints,muscles,and soft tissue) to decide
the cause of various rheumatic symptoms,to be educated Resources
about fibromyalgia and its treatment,and to exclude other
BOOKS
rheumatic diseases. A treatment program must be individ-
Schumacher,H. R. Primer on the Rheumatic Diseases.Atlanta:
ualized to meet the patient’s needs. The rheumatologist,
Arthritis Foundation,1988.
as the team leader,enlists and coordinates the expertise of
other health professionals in the care of the patient. ORGANIZATIONS
The American College of Rheumatology. 1800 Century Place,
Suite 250,Atlanta,GA 30345. (404) 633-3777. <http://
Alternative treatment www.rheumatology.org>.
Arthritis Foundation.1300 W. Peachtree St.,Atlanta,GA
Massage therapycan be helpful,especially when a
30309. (800) 283-7800. <http://www.arthritis.org>.
family member is instructed on specific massage tech-
niques to manage episodes of increased symptoms. Spe- Jeffrey P. Larson,RPT
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1327
Fibromyalgia
Fibromyomas see Uterine fibroids
Fibrous breast lumps see Fibroadenoma
Fifth disease
Definition
Fifth disease is a mild childhood illness caused by
the human parvovirus B19 that causes flu-like symptoms
and a rash. It is called fifth disease because it was fifth on
a list of common childhood illnesses that are accompa-
nied by a rash, including measles, rubella or German
measles,scarlet fever(or scarlatina),and scarlatinella,a
variant of scarlet fever.
Description
The Latin name for the disease is erythema infectio-
This infant has a rash caused by Fifth disease,or erythema
sum, meaning infectious redness. It is also called the
infectiosum.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by
“slapped cheek disease” because, when the bright red permission.)
rash first appears on the cheeks,it looks as if the face has
been slapped. Anyone can get the disease,but it occurs
long as five to six weeks. The rash may fade away and
more frequently in school-aged children. The disease is
then reappear upon exposure to sunlight,hot baths,emo-
usually mild,and both children and adults usually recov-
tional distress,or vigorous exercise.
er quickly without complications. In fact,some individu-
als exhibit no symptoms and never even feel ill. Out- Adults generally do not develop a rash,but instead may
breaks most often occur in the winter and spring. have swollen and painful joints,especially in the hands and
feet. In adults, symptoms such as sore throat, headache,
muscle and joint pain,abdominal pain,diarrhea,and vom-
Causes and symptoms
iting occur more frequently than in children and are usually
Fifth disease is caused by the human parvovirus B19, more severe. The joint pain can be arthritis-like and last for
a member of the Parvoviridae family of viruses,that lives several months,especially in women,but the disease does
in the nose and throat of the infected person. The virus is not appear to progress to rheumatoid arthritis.
spread through the air by coughing and sneezing. Because
The virus causes the destruction of red blood cells
the virus needs a rapidly dividing cell in order to multiply,
and, therefore, a deficiency in the oxygen-carrying
it attacks the red blood cells of the body. Once infected,a
capacity of the blood (anemia) can result. In healthy peo-
person is believed to be immune to reinfection.
ple, the anemia is mild and only lasts a short while. In
Symptoms may appear four to 21 days after being people with weakened immune systems,however,either
exposed to the virus. Initial symptoms are flu-like and because they have a chronic disease like AIDSor cancer
include headache,body ache,sore throat,a mild fever (immunocompromised),or are receiving medication to
of 101°F (38.3°C),and chills. It is at this time,prior to suppress the immune system (immunosuppressed),such
the development of the rash,that individuals are conta- as organ transplant recipients,this anemia can be severe
gious. These symptoms last for two to three days. In chil- and last long after the infection has subsided. Symptoms
dren,a bright red rash that looks like a slap mark devel- of anemia include fatigue,lack of color,lack of energy,
ops suddenly on the cheeks. The rash may be flat or and shortness of breath. Some individuals with sickle
raised and may or may not be itchy. Sometimes,the rash cell anemia,iron deficiency,a number of different hered-
spreads to the arms,legs,and trunk,where it has a lace- itary blood disorders,and those who have received bone
like or net-like appearance. The rash can also involve the marrow transplantations may be susceptible to develop-
palms of the hands and soles of the feet. By the time the ing a potentially life-threatening complication called a
rash appears, individuals are no longer infectious. On transient aplastic crisis where the body is temporarily
average,the rash lasts for 10–11 days,but may last for as unable to form new red blood cells.
1328 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
htfiF
In very rare instances,the virus can cause inflamma-
tion of different areas of the body, including the brain KEY TERMS
(encephalitis),the covering of the brain and spinal cord
(meningitis),the lungs (pneumonitis),the liver (hepati- Anemia—A congenital or acquired deficiency in
tis),and the heart muscle (myocarditis). The virus can the iron-carrying capacity of the blood.
also aggravate symptoms for people with an autoimmune
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the
disease called systemic lupus erythematosus.
immune system in response to a specific foreign
There is some concern about fifth disease in pregnant protein or particle called an antigen.
women. Although no association with an increased number
Immunocompromised—A state in which the
of birth defectshas been demonstrated,there is concern
immune system is weakened or is not functioning
that infection during the first three months of pregnancy
properly due to chronic disease.
may lead to a slight increase in the number of miscarriages.
There is also some concern that infection later in pregnancy Immunosuppressed—A state in which the immune
may involve a very small risk of premature delivery or still- system is suppressed by medications during the
births. As a result,women who get fifth disease while they treatment of other disorders, like cancer, or follow-
are pregnant should be monitored closely by a physician. ing an organ transplantation.
Reye’s syndrome—A very serious, rare disease,
Diagnosis most common in children, that involves an upper
respiratory tract infection followed by brain and
Fifth disease is usually suspected based on a
liver damage.
patient’s symptoms,including the typical appearance of
the bright red rash on the cheeks,patient history,age,and Sickle cell anemia—A hereditary blood disorder
the time of year. The physician will also exclude other in which the red blood cells are misshapen into
potential causes for the symptoms and rash, including crescent or sickle shapes resulting in the reduced
rubella,infectious mononucleosis,bacterial infections oxygen-carrying capacity of the lungs.
like Lyme disease,allergic reactions,and lupus.
In addition,there is a blood test for fifth disease,but it
is generally used only for pregnant women and for people
ened (not suppressed) immune systems, such as AIDS
who have weakened immune systems or who suffer from
patients,may be given immunoglobulin intravenously to
blood disorders, such as sickle cell anemia. The test
help the immune system fight the infection. People with
involves measuring for a particular antibody or protein that
severe anemia or who experience an aplastic crisis may
the body produces in response to infection with the human
require hospitalization and blood transfusions.
parvovirus B19. The test is 92–97% specific for this disease.
Because fifth disease can pose problems for an unborn
Prognosis
fetus exposed to the disease through the mother, testing
may also be conducted while a fetus is still in the uterus. Generally,fifth disease is mild,and patients tend to
This test uses fluid collected from the sac around the fetus improve without any complications. In cases where the
(amniotic fluid) instead of blood to detect the viral DNA. patient is either immunocompromised or immunosup-
pressed,a life-threatening aplastic crisis can occur. With
Treatment prompt treatment,however,the prognosis is good. Moth-
ers who develop the infection while pregnant can pass
In general,no specific treatment for fifth disease is
the infection on to their fetus, and as such, stand an
required. The symptoms can be treated using over-the
increased risk of miscarriageand stillbirth. There are
counter medications,such as acetaminophen(Tylenol)
tests and treatments,however,that can be performed on
or ibuprofen (Motrin,Advil). If the rash itches,calamine
the fetus while still in the uterus that can reduce the risk
lotion can be applied. Aspirin is usually not given to
of anemia or other complications.
children under the age of 18 to prevent the development
of a serious illness called Reye’s syndrome.
Prevention
Patients who are receiving medications to suppress
the immune system in the treatment of some other condi- Currently,there is no vaccine against fifth disease.
tion may be allowed to temporarily decrease the medica- Avoiding contact with persons who exhibit symptoms of
tions in order to allow the immune system to combat the a cold and maintaining good personal hygiene by regu-
infection and recover from the anemia. Those with weak- larly washing hands may minimize the chances of an
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1329
Fifth
disease
infection. Pregnant women should avoid exposure to per- areas beneath the skin and whites of the eye; and serous
sons infected with the disease and notify their obstetri- cavity filariasis infects body cavities but does not cause
cian immediately if they are exposed so that they can be disease. Several different types of worms can be respon-
tested and monitored closely. sible for each type of filariasis, but the most common
species include the following:Wucheria bancrofti,Bru-
gia malayi(lymphatic filariasis),Onchocerca volvulus,
Resources
Loa loa, Mansonella streptocerca, Dracunculus medi-
BOOKS nensis (subcutaneous filariasis), Mansonella pustans,
Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.16th ed. Ed. Robert
and Mansonella ozzardi(serous cavity filariasis).
Berkow,et al. Rahway,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,
1992. The two most common types of the disease are Ban-
Ray,C. George. “Rubella and Other Viral Exanthems.”In Har- croftian and Malayan filariasis,both forms of lymphatic
rison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Jean D. Wil- filariasis. The Bancroftian variety is found throughout
son,et al. New York:McGraw Hill,1991. Africa, southern and southeastern Asia, the Pacific
Zinsser,Hans. Zinsser Microbiology.19th ed. Ed. Wolfgang K. islands,and the tropical and subtropical regions of South
Joklik,et al. Stamford:Appleton Lange,1988. America and the Caribbean. Malayan filariasis occurs
only in southern and southeastern Asia. Filariasis is occa-
Lata Cherath,PhD
sionally found in the United States, especially among
immigrants from the Caribbean and Pacific islands.
A larvae matures into an adult worm within six
months to one year and can live between four and six
years. Each female worm can produce millions of larvae,
Filariasis
and these larvae only appear in the bloodstream at night,
when they may be transmitted,via an insect bite,to anoth-
Definition
er host. A single bite is usually not enough to acquire an
Filiariasis is the name for a group of tropical dis- infection,therefore,short-term travelers are usually safe.
eases caused by various thread-like parasitic round A series of multiple bites over a period of time is required
worms (nematodes) and their larvae. The larvae transmit to establish an infection. As a result,those individuals who
the disease to humans through a mosquito bite. Filariasis are regularly active outdoors at night and those who spend
is characterized by fever, chills, headache, and skin more time in remote jungle areas are at an increased risk
lesionsin the early stages and,if untreated,can progress of contracting the filariasis infection.
to include gross enlargement of the limbs and genitalia in
a condition called elephantiasis. Causes and symptoms
In cases of lymphatic filariasis, the most common
Description form of the disease, the disease is caused by the adult
worms actually living in the lymphatic vessels near the
Approximately 170 million people in the tropical and
lymph nodes where they distort the vessels and cause local
subtropical areas of southeast Asia,South America,Africa,
inflammation. In advanced stages,the worms can actually
and the islands of the Pacific are affected by this debilitat-
obstruct the vessels, causing the surrounding tissue to
ing parasitic disease. While filariasis is rarely fatal,it is the
become enlarged. In Bancroftian filariasis, the legs and
second leading cause of permanent and long-term disabili-
genitals are most often involved,while the Malayan vari-
ty in the world. The World Health Organization (WHO)
ety affects the legs below the knees. Repeated episodes of
has named filariasis one of only six “potentially eradica-
inflammation lead to blockages of the lymphatic system,
ble”infectious diseases and has embarked upon a 20-year
especially in the genitals and legs. This causes the affected
campaign to eradicate the disease.
area to become grossly enlarged,with thickened,coarse
In all cases,a mosquito first bites an infected indi-
skin,leading to a condition called elephantiasis.
vidual then bites another uninfected individual,transfer-
In conjunctiva filariasis,the worms’larvae migrate
ring some of the worm larvae to the new host. Once with-
to the eye and can sometimes be seen moving beneath
in the body,the larvae migrate to a particular part of the
the skin or beneath the white part of the eye (conjuncti-
body and mature to adult worms. Filariasis is classified
va). If untreated,this disease can cause a type of blind-
into three distinct types according to the part of the body
ness known as onchocerciasis.
that becomes infected:lymphatic filariasis affects the cir-
culatory system that moves tissue fluid and immune cells Symptoms vary,depending on what type of parasitic
(lymphatic system); subcutaneous filariasis infects the worm has caused the infection,but all infections usually
1330 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisairaliF
begin with chills, headache, and fever between three the fluid around the damaged lymphatic vessels. Surgery
months and one year after the insect bite. There may also may also be used to ease massive enlargement of the scro-
be swelling,redness,and painin the arms,legs,or scro- tum. Elephantiasis of the legs can also be helped by elevat-
tum. Areas of pus (abscesses) may appear as a result of ing the legs and providing support with elastic bandages.
dying worms or a secondary bacterial infection.
Prognosis
Diagnosis
The outlook is good in early or mild cases,especially
The disease is diagnosed by taking a patient history, if the patient can avoid being infected again. The disease
performing a physical examination, and by screening is rarely fatal,and with continued WHO medical inter-
blood specimens for specific proteins produced by the vention,even gross elephantiasis is now becoming rare.
immune system in response to this infection (antibodies).
Early diagnosis may be difficult because, in the first
stages,the disease mimics other bacterial skin infections. Prevention
To make an accurate diagnosis,the physician looks for a
The best method of preventing filariasis is to prevent
pattern of inflammation and signs of lymphatic obstruc-
being repeatedly bitten by the mosquitoes that carry the
tion, together with the patient’s possible exposure to
disease. Some methods of preventing insect bites include
filariasis in an area where filariasis is common. The lar-
the following:
vae (microfilariae) can also be found in the blood, but
•limit outdoor activities at night,particularly in rural or
because mosquitos,which spread the disease,are active
jungle areas
at night,the larvae are usually only found in the blood
between about 10 pm and 2 am. •wear long sleeves and pants and avoid dark-colored
clothing that attracts mosquitoes
Treatment •avoid perfumes and colognes
Either ivermectin, albendazole, or diethylcarba- •treat one or two sets of clothing ahead of time with per-
mazine is used to treat a filariasis infection by eliminat- methrin (Duramon,Permanone)
ing the larvae, impairing the adult worms’ ability to •wear DEET insect repellent or,especially for children,
reproduce,and by actually killing adult worms. Unfortu- try citronella or lemon eucalyptus,to repel insects
nately,much of the tissue damage may not be reversible.
•if sleeping in an open area or in a room with poor
The medication is started at low doses to prevent reac-
screens,use a bed net to avoid being bitten while asleep
tions caused by large numbers of dying parasites.
•use air conditioning,the cooler air makes insects less
While effective, the medications can cause severe
active
side effects in up to 70% of patients as a result either of
the drug itself or the massive death of parasites in the In addition,filariasis can be controlled in highly infest-
blood. Diethylcarbamazine, for example, can cause ed areas by taking ivermectin preventatively before being
severe allergic reactions and the formation of pus-filled bitten. Currently,there is no vaccine available,but scien-
sores (abscesses). These side effects can be controlled tists are working on a preventative vaccine at this time.
using antihistaminesand anti-inflammatory drugs (cor-
ticosteroids). Rarely,treatment with diethylcarbamazine
Resources
in someone with very high levels of parasite infection
may lead to a fatal inflammation of the brain (encephali- BOOKS
tis). In this case,the fever is followed by headache and Infectious Disease.Ed. Barbara A. Bannister,et al. Oxford,
confusion,then stupor and comacaused when massive England:Blackwell Scientific,Inc.,1996.
numbers of larvae and parasites die. Other common drug Turkington,Carol A. Infectious Diseases A to Z.New York:
Facts on File,Inc.,1998.
reactions include dizziness,weakness,and nausea.
Van De Graaff,Kent. Survey of Infectious and Parasitic Dis-
Symptoms caused by the death of the parasites eases.New York:McGraw Hill,1996.
include fever, headache, muscle pain, abdominal pain, Wilks,David,Mark Farrington,and David Rubenstein. The
nausea and vomiting,weakness,dizziness,lethargy,and Infectious Diseases Manual.Oxford,England:Blackwell
asthma. Reactions usually begin within two days of start- Scientific,Inc.,1995.
ing treatment and may last between two and four days.
PERIODICALS
No treatment can reverse elephantiasis. Surgery may Burnham,Gilbert M. “Ivermectin Where Loa Loa is Endemic.”
be used to remove surplus tissue and provide a way to drain The Lancet349,no. 0070 (5 July 1997):2-3.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1331
Filariasis
“Filariasis (Other Than Loa Loa and Onchocerciasis).”Travel
KEY TERMS Health Information Page.5 Mar. 1997 <http://www.
travelhealth.com>.
International Society of Travel Medicine.<http:www.istm.org>.
Abscess—An area of inflamed and injured body
King,J. W. “Bug Bytes.”Louisiana State University Medical
tissue that fills with pus.
Center. <http://www.ccm.lsumc.edu/bugbytes>.
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the “Lymphatic Filariasis.”Centers for Disease Control.<http://
immune system in response to a specific foreign www.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbk/page117.htm>.
protein or particle called an antigen.
Carol A. Turkington
Conjunctiva—The mucous membrane that lines
the inside of the eyelid and the exposed surface of
Filgras see Cancer therapy, supportive;
the eyeball.
Immunologic therapies
Elephantiasis—A condition characterized by the
Fingernail removal see Nail removal
gross enlargement of limbs and/or the genitalia
that is also accompanied by a hardening and
stretching of the overlying skin. Often a result of
an obstruction in the lymphatic system caused by
infection with a filarial worm.
Encephalitis—Inflammation of the brain. Fingertip injuries
Lymphatic system—The circulatory system that
Definition
drains and circulates fluid containing nutrients,
waste products, and immune cells, from between Fingertip trauma covers cuts,accumulation of blood
cells, organs, and other tissue spaces. (hematoma),bone breakage,or amputationin the fin-
gertip.
Microfilariae—The larvae and infective form of
filarial worms.
Description
Nematode—Round worms.
Subcutaneous—The area directly beneath the skin. The fingertips are specialized areas of the hand with
highly developed sensory and manipulative functions.
Large sensory and motor areas located in the brain regu-
late the precise and delicate functions of fingertips. The
fingertip is the site where extensor and flexor tendons
Cunningham,Nancy M. “Lymphatic Filariasis in Immigrants
From Developing Countries.”American Family Physician insert. Fingertip injuries are extremely common since the
55,no. 4 (Mar. 1997):1199-1204. hands hold a wide array of objects. In 2001,the approxi-
WHO editors. “Lymphatic Filariasis:Diagnosis and Pathogen- mately 10% of all accidents in the United States referred
esis.”Bulletin of the World Health Organization71,no. 2 for Emergency Room consults involve the hand. Hand
(Mar./Apr. 1993):135-41. injuries are frequently the result of job injuries and
account for 11–14% of on-the-job injuries and 6% of
ORGANIZATIONS compensation paid injuries. Injury to the nail bed occurs
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., in approximately 15–24% of fingertip injuries.
NE,Atlanta,GA 30333. (800) 311-3435,(404) 639-3311.
Fingertip injuries can result in amputation or tissue
<http://www.cdc.gov>.
loss. The injury is assessed whether the bone and underly-
National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases,Divi-
ing tissue are intact and the size of the wound area. The
sion of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. Building
pulp is the area of skin opposite the fingernail and is usu-
31,Room. 7A-50,31 Center Drive MSC 2520,Bethesda,
MD 20892. <http://www.niaid.nih.gov>. ally very vulnerable to injury. Pulp injuries commonly
World Health Organization,Division of Emerging and Other occur in persons who use or are in close contact with fast
Communicable Diseases Surveillance and Control. moving mechanical devices. These injuries can crush,cut,
Avenue Appia 20,1211 Geneva 27,Switzerland. (+00 41 and puncture. The fingertips can also be injured by com-
22) 791 21 11. <http://www.who.int>. mon crushing accidents. This could cause the develop-
ment of a subungal hematoma (an accumulation of blood
OTHER under the nail). At the base of the distal phalanx (the first
“Bacterial Diseases.”Healthtouch Online Page.<http://www. circular skin fold from the tip) injuries can occur that can
healthtouch.com>. fracture the underlying bone in the area. Quite commonly
1332 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
seirujni
pitregniF
a hammer,closing a door,or sport accidents usually cause
these injuries. These fracturescan be simple,requiring KEY TERMS
little treatment or more complicated involving the joint.
The accident may involve the point of insertion of a ten- Distal—Movement away from the origin.
don. Usually this occurs when the terminal joint is being
Flex—To bend.
forced to flex while held straight. This motion typically
occurs when tucking in sheets during bed making,a com- Laceration—A cut in the skin
mon cause of tendon injury. This injury causes a loss of Phalanx—A bone of the fingers or toes.
extension (straightening the finger) ability.
Tendon—A structure that connects a skeletal mus-
cle to bone.
Causes and symptoms
Accidental amputations will usually result in profuse
bleeding and tissue loss. Injuries to the pulp can occur as
from fast moving mechanical instruments,such as drills. healthy tissue will usually grow and replace the injured
These injuries may puncture the pulp. Injuries such as a area. Larger wounds may require surgical intervention.
subungal hematoma are caused by a crushing type injury. Puncture wounds should be cleaned and left open to heal.
Fractures typically occur as the result of crushing injuries Patients typically receive antibiotics to prevent infec-
or tendon avulsion. These crushing injuries are frequently tion. A procedure called trephining treats subungal
caused during sport injury and can be treated by simple hematomas. This procedure is usually done with a
interventions such as immobilizationor more complex straight cutting needle positioned over the nail. The clini-
procedures if tendons are affected (the trauma is then cian spins the needle with forefinger and thumb until a
treated as a tendon injury). Fractures can cause painand, hole is made through the nail.
depending on the extent of swelling,there may be some
Patients who have extensive crush injuries or subun-
restriction of movement. Tendon injuries can be caused
gal hematomas involving laceration to skin folds or nail
when the terminal joint is exposed to force flexing motion
damage should have the nail removed to examine the
(moving the finger toward the palm) while held straight.
underlying tissue (called the matrix). Patients who have a
closed subungal hematoma with an intact nail and no
Diagnosis other damage (no nail disruption or laceration) are treat-
ed conservatively. If the fracture is located two-thirds
The attending clinician should evaluate the injury in
below the fingertip immobilization using a splint may be
a careful and systematic manner. The appearance of the
needed. Conservative treatment is recommended for
hand can provide valuable information concerning pres-
crush injuries that fracture the terminal phalanx if a sub-
ence of fractures, vascular status, and tendon involve-
ungal hematoma is not present. Severe fractures near the
ment. Bones and joints should be evaluated for motion
fist circular skin crease may require surgical correction
and tenderness. Nerves should be examined for sensory
to prevent irregularity of the joint surface, which can
(feeling sensations) and motor (movement) functioning.
cause difficulty with movement. Injury to a flexor tendon
Amputations usually profusely bleed and there is tissue
usually requires surgical repair. If this is not possible,the
loss. The wound is treated based on loss of tissue,bone,
finger and wrist should be placed in a splint with specific
and wound area. Injuries to the pulp can be obvious dur-
positioning to prevent further damage.
ing inspection. Subungal hematoma usually present a
purplish-black discoloration under the nail. This is due to
a hematoma underneath the nail. Radiographs may be Prognosis
required to assess the alignment of fractures or detect
Prognosis depends on the extent of traumatic dam-
foreign bodies. Patients usually suffer from pain since
age to the affected area. Nail lacerations that are not
injuries to the fingertip bone are usually painful and
treated may cause nail deformities. When amputation is
movement may be partially restricted due to swelling of
accompanied with loss of two-thirds of the nail,half of
the affected area. Tendon injuries usually result in the
the fingers develop beaking,or a curved nail. Aftercare
loss of ability to straighten or bend the finger.
and follow up are important components of treatment.
The patient is advised to keep the hand elevated,check
Treatment
with a clinician two days after treatment, and to splint
Amputation with bone and underlying tissue intact fractures for two weeks in the extended position. Usually
and a wound area 1 cm or less should be cleaned and a nail takes about 100 days to fully grow. Healing for an
treated with a dressing. With these types of wounds amputation takes about 21 to 27 days. This markedly
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1333
Fingertip
injuries
decreases in elderly patients,primarily due to a compro- watery diarrhea. The most characteristic symptoms of
mised circulation normally part of advancing age. the illness are those involving the nervous system. These
include numbness and tinglingaround the lips,tongue,
Resources and mouth; itching; dry mouth; metallic taste in the
mouth; and blurry vision. In more prominent cases,
BOOKS
patients may complain of temporary blindness, a slow
Rosen,Peter. Emergency Medicine:Concepts and Clinical
pulse, and a feeling that their teeth are loose. Patients
Practice.4th ed. Mosby-Year Book,Inc.,1998.
may also have the strange symptom of reversal of hot and
Townshend,Courtney M.,et al. Sabiston Textbook of Surgery.
cold sensations on the skin,where cold things feel very
16th ed. W. B. Saunders Company,2001.
hot or painful to the touch. In very severe cases, there
PERIODICALS
may be difficulties in breathing or low blood pressure.
Shetty,P.,S. Dicksheet,and T. Scalea. “Fingertip Injuries:
Immediate Reconstruction versus Delayed Healing.”
American Journal of Emergency Medicine14 (Jan. 1996). Diagnosis
ORGANIZATION Ciguatera diagnosis is based on the typical combina-
American Society of Plastic Surgeons. 444 E. Algonquin Rd., tion of symptoms after eating fish. There are no readily
Arlington Heights,IL. (888) 475-2784. available blood or urine tests to detect the poisoning,but
some researchers have developed a test for the toxin left
Laith Farid Gulli,M.D. on any remaining fish. A person does not have to be in a
tropical area to get ciguatera. Fish can be caught from
one of these distant areas,and can then be shipped and
eaten locally. It is important to report suspected cases to
local public health officials because more cases may
Fish and shellfish poisoning occur from other contaminated fish.
Definition
Treatment
Fish and shellfish poisoningis a common but often
The treatment for this illness is general. Patients are
unrecognized group of illnesses related to food. Three of
given fluids (by mouth or through a vein) and medica-
these illnesses include ciguatera,scombroid,and paralyt-
tions to decrease the itching or to treat vomiting and/or
ic shellfish poisoning.
diarrhea. The neurological symptoms can cause discom-
fort and treatment with amitriptyline (a medicine that has
Ciguatera
been used for depression) may be useful. Other medica-
Definition tions may also be given.
Ciguatera (from the Spanish word for a poisonous
Prognosis
snail) is a food-related illness that causes abdominal and
neurological symptoms. Although deathcan occur,almost all patients diag-
nosed with ciguatera will recover. Recovery, however,
Causes and symptoms can be slow and some symptoms can last for weeks or
even months. Symptoms can also be aggravated by other
Ciguatera is caused by eating fish that have a toxin
illnesses or alcohol.
called ciguatoxin. Scientists believe this toxin is acquired
by the fish through the food chain,and is originally pro-
duced by small algae microorganisms (dinoflagellates). Prevention
The fish most likely contaminated with ciguatoxin are
Knowing the kinds of fish linked to ciguatera can
those that feed close to tropical reefs,including red snap-
help a person avoid eating high-risk fish. However,over
per,grouper,and barracuda. Larger fish are more likely
400 different kinds of fish have been linked to the dis-
to contain the toxin. Although not as common in the
ease,even salmon. A particular fish in a given area may
United States, ciguatera is commonly diagnosed on
be more likely to cause ciguatera than other fish. For
many of the islands in the Pacific Ocean.
example,red snapper is most often the source of ciguat-
Illness from ciguatera can occur in just a few min- era in the Pacific,while barracuda is more likely to con-
utes to about 30 hours after eating. Most cases occur one tain the toxin in Florida. This is why it is illegal to sell
to six hours after eating the contaminated fish. Initial barracuda in Florida for human consumption. Cooking
symptoms are abdominal cramps,nausea,vomiting,or the fish does not prevent ciguatera.
1334 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gninosiop
hsifllehs
dna
hsiF
Scombroid
KEY TERMS
Definition
Scombroid is a fish-associated illness caused by eat- Algae—Plants that have one cell.
ing improperly handled fish. Fish linked to this disease
Histamine—A chemical found naturally in the
are usually in the Scombridae family,which includes yel-
body that produces inflammation and increases
lowfin tuna,skipjack,bonito,and mackerel.
blood flow; the uncomfortable symptoms of an
allergy attack or an allergic reaction are generally
Causes and symptoms
caused by the release of histamine.
Scombroid occurs after eating fish that has not Toxin—A poisonous substance usually produced
been properly refrigerated after capture. Unlike ciguat- by a living thing.
era,the toxins linked with scombroid are not contracted
by the fish from its surroundings. Bacteria that are nor-
mally found in fish act directly on a chemical (called
histidine) in the flesh of fish that are not properly
Prognosis
cooled when stored. This interaction produces hista-
mine and other chemicals that cause the illness when Although sometimes dramatic and alarming symptoms
the fish is eaten. can occur, scombroid is usually not serious. The patient
should be reassured that scombroid is not a fish allergy.
Symptoms of scombroid occur quickly after eating
the fish, as soon as 10 minutes. Since histamine is
Prevention
released by certain cells in the body during an allergic
reaction,scombroid can be confused with a fish allergy. Adequate storage of the target fish will always pre-
Scombroid causes flushing of the face,sweating,a burn- vent scombroid. Since the fish does not appear spoiled or
ing feeling in the mouth or throat, vomiting, diarrhea, smell bad,the consumer cannot detect the risk of the ill-
and headaches. A rash that looks like a sunburn may ness before eating the fish. Cooking the fish does not pre-
occur,and a small number of patients have hives. Some vent scombroid. Suspected cases should be reported to
patients have a metallic or peppery taste in their mouths. public health officials.
In more severe cases,rapid pulse,blurred vision,and dif-
ficulty breathing can occur. Symptoms usually last about
Paralytic shellfish poisoning
four hours.
Definition
Diagnosis
Paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) is a nervous system
Like ciguatera,scombroid poisoning is diagnosed disease caused by eating cooked or raw shellfish that con-
based on typical symptoms occurring after eating fish. tain environmental toxins. These toxins are produced by a
There are usually no available tests for the patient. group of algae (dinoflagellates). It is unclear whether these
Experimentally,however,elevated levels of histamine- toxins are related to the “blooming” of the algae, also
related products have been found in the urine. It may called red tide because the algae can turn the water reddish
be possible for public health officials to test any brown. PSP occurs mostly in May through November.
remaining fish flesh for histamine levels. Improperly
refrigerated fish caught in both temperate and tropical Causes and symptoms
waters have been linked to the illness. An outbreak of
PSP develops usually within minutes after eating a
similar cases may be helpful in correctly diagnosing
contaminated shellfish,most commonly a mussel,clam,
the problem.
or oyster. Symptoms include headache,a floating feel-
ing,dizziness,lack of coordination,and tingling of the
Treatment
mouth,arms,or legs. Muscle weakness causing difficulty
The treatment for scombroid is usually general. swallowing or speaking may occur. Abdominal symptoms
Antihistamineslike diphenhydramine (Benadryl) may such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea can also occur.
shorten the duration of the illness,but the illness will go Unlike ciguatera and scombroid,PSP may have a much
away on its own. Some doctors have found that cimeti- more serious outcome. PSP may cause difficulty breath-
dine (Tagamet) given through a vein may be helpful as ing related to weakness or paralysis of the breathing
well. In rare,more severe cases,epinephrine (adrenaline) muscle. The symptoms may last for six to 12 hours,but a
may be used. patient may continue to feel weak for a week or more.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1335
Fish
and
shellfish
poisoning
Diagnosis
Flesh-eating disease
PSP diagnosis is based on symptoms after eating
shellfish,even if the shellfish are adequately cooked. No
Definition
blood or urine test is available to diagnose the illness,but
tests in mice to detect the toxin from the eaten fish can be Flesh-eating disease is more properly called necro-
done by public health officials. tizing fasciitis,a rare condition in which bacteria destroy
tissues underlying the skin. This tissue death, called
necrosis or gangrene,spreads rapidly. This disease can
Treatment
be fatal in as little as 12 to 24 hours.
The treatment of PSP is mostly supportive. If early
symptoms are recognized,the doctor will try to flush the
toxin from the gastrointestinal tract with medications that Description
create diarrhea. Vomiting may be induced if the patient
Although the term is technically incorrect,flesh-eat-
has no signs of weakness. In cases where the muscles of
ing disease is an apt descriptor:the infection appears to
breathing are weakened,the patient may be placed on a
devour body tissue. Media reports increased in the mid-
respirator until the weakness goes away. However,this
dle and late 1990s, but the disease is not new. Hip-
measure is not usually needed. Likewise, the use of a
pocrates described it more than three millennia ago and
machine to clean the blood (dialysis) has been used in
thousands of reports exist from the Civil War. Approxi-
severe cases.
mately 500 to 1,500 cases of necrotizing fasciitis occur
in the United States each year.
Prognosis
Flesh-eating disease is divided into two types. Type I
The prognosis for PSP is quite good, especially if is caused by anaerobic bacteria,with or without the pres-
the patient has passed the initial 12 hours of illness with- ence of aerobic bacteria. Type II,also called hemolytic
out needing breathing support. Most deaths occur during streptococcal gangrene,is caused by group A streptococ-
this period if breathing help is not available. ci; other bacteria may or may not be present. The disease
may also be called synergistic gangrene.
Prevention
Type I fasciitis typically affects the trunk,abdomen,
Measures to control PSP require detecting rising and genital area. For example,Fournier’s gangrene is a
numbers of algae in coastal waters by periodic micro- “flesh-eating”disease in which the infection encompass-
scopic examination. By law, shellfish beds are closed es the external genitalia. The arms and legs are most
when levels of the toxin-producing organisms are above often affected in type II fasciitis,but the infection may
acceptable standards. Cooking the shellfish does not pre- appear anywhere.
vent this disease. Suspected cases should be reported to
public health officials.
Causes and symptoms
The two most important factors in determining
Resources
whether or not a person will develop flesh-eating disease
PERIODICALS are:the virulence (ability to cause disease) of the bacteria
Barton,Erik D.,Paula Tanner,Steven G. Turchen,et al.
and the susceptibility (ability of a person’s immune sys-
“Ciguatera Fish Poisoning:A Southern California Epi-
tem to respond to infection) of the person who becomes
demic.”Western Journal of Medicine163,no. 1 (July
infected with this bacteria.
1995):31-35.
Eastaugh,Janet,and Suzanne Shepherd. “Infectious and Toxic In nearly every case of flesh-eating disease,a skin
Syndromes from Fish and Shellfish Consumption.” injury precedes the disease. As bacteria grow beneath the
Archives of Internal Medicine149 (Aug. 1989):1735- skin’s surface,they produce toxins. These toxins destroy
1740.
superficial fascia,subcutaneous fat,and deep fascia. In
Gellert,George A.,John Ralls,Corwin Brown,et al. “Scom-
some cases, the overlying dermis and the underlying
broid Fish Poisoning:Underreporting and Prevention
muscle are also affected.
Among Noncommercial Recreational Fishers.”Western
Journal of Medicine157,no. 6 (Dec. 1992):645-647. Initially,the infected area appears red and swollen
and feels hot. The area is extremely painful,which is a
Larry Lutwick,MD,FACP prominent feature of the disease. Over the course of
hours or days,the skin may become blue-gray,and fluid-
5p- syndrome see Cri du chat syndrome filled blisters may form. As nerves are destroyed the area
1336 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
gnitae-hselF
becomes numb. An individual may go into shock and
develop dangerously low blood pressure. Multiple organ KEY TERMS
failure may occur,quickly followed by death.
Aerobic bacteria—Bacteria that require oxygen to
Diagnosis live and grow.
The appearance of the skin, paired with pain and Anaerobic bacteria—Bacteria that require the
feverraises the possibility of flesh-eating disease. An x absence of oxygen to live and grow.
ray,magnetic resonance imaging(MRI),or computed
CT scan (computed tomography scan)—Cross-
tomography scans (CT scans) of the area reveals a
sectional x rays of the body are compiled to create
feathery pattern in the tissue, caused by accumulating
a three-dimensional image of the body’s internal
gas in the dying tissue. Necrosis is evident during
structures.
exploratory surgery,during which samples are collected
Debridement—Surgical procedure in which dead
for bacterial identification.
or dying tissue is removed.
Dermis—The deepest layer of skin.
Treatment
Fascia, deep—A fibrous layer of tissue that
Rapid, aggressive medical treatment, specifically,
envelopes muscles.
antibiotic therapy and surgical debridement,is impera-
tive. Antibioticsmay include penicillin,an aminoglyco- Fascia, superficial—A fibrous layer of tissue that
side or third-generation cephalosporin,and clindamycin lies between the deepest layer of skin and the sub-
or metronidazole. Analgesicsare employed for pain con- cutaneous fat.
trol. During surgical debridement,dead tissue is stripped
Gangrene—An extensive area of dead tissue.
away. After surgery,patients are rigorously monitored for
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy—A treatment in which
continued infection, shock, or other complications. If
the patient is placed in a chamber and breathes
available,hyperbaric oxygen therapy has also be used.
oxygen at higher-than-atmospheric pressure. This
high-pressure oxygen stops bacteria from growing
Prognosis
and, at high enough pressure, kills them.
Flesh-eating disease has a fatality rate of about 30%.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—An imaging
Diabetes,arteriosclerosis,immunosuppression,kidney
technique that uses a large circular magnet and
disease,malnutrition,and obesityare connected with a
radio waves to generate signals from atoms in the
poor prognosis. Older individuals and intravenous drug
body. These signals are used to construct images of
users may also be at higher risk. The infection site also
internal structures.
has a role. Survivors may require plastic surgery and may
have to contend with permanent physical disability and Necrosis—Abnormal death of cells, potentially
psychological adjustment. caused by disease or infection.
Subcutaneous—Referring to the area beneath the
skin.
Prevention
Flesh-eating disease,which occurs very rarely,can-
not be definitively prevented. The best ways to lower the
risk of contracting flesh-eating disease are:
Resources
•take care to avoid any injury to the skin that may give
BOOKS
the bacteria a place of entry
Roemmele,Jacqueline A.,Donna Batdorff,and Alan L. Bisno.
•when skin injuries do occur,they should be promptly Surviving the ‘Flesh-Eating Bacteria’:Understanding,
Preventing,Treating,and Living With the Effects of Necro-
washed and treated with an antibiotic ointment or spray
tizing Fascitis.New York:Avery Penguin Putnam,2000.
•people who have any skin injury should rigorously
attempt to avoid people who are infected with streptococ- PERIODICALS
ci bacteria. A bacteria that causes a simple strep throatin Kotrappa,Kavitha S.,Radhey S. Bansal,and Navin M. Amin.
one person may cause flesh-eating disease in another “Necrotizing Fasciitis.”American Family Physician53
(May 1996):1691.
•have any areas of unexplained redness, pain, or
Meltzer,Daniel L.,and Martin Kabongo. “Necrotizing Fasci-
swelling examined by a doctor, particularly if the itis:A Diagnostic Challenge.”American Family Physician
affected area seems to be expanding 56 (Jan. 1997):145.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1337
Flesh-eating
disease
Ruth-Sahd,Lisa A.,and Mary Pirrung. “The Infection That devote his life to this research. It is known that at this
Eats Patients Alive.”RN 1997(Mar. 1997):28. point,he ceased to dispense the mixture of homeopathy
and allopathic medicine that he had been using. Instead,he
ORGANIZATIONS
began investigating the healing properties of plant
National Necrotizing Fascitis Foundation. PO Box 145,Niantic,
CT 06357. (616) 261-2538. <http://www.nnff.org/>. essences and discovered that he possessed an “intuition”
for judging the properties of each flower. Accordingly,he
Paul A. Johnson developed the system of treatment that bears his name,and
is also the foundation for all other flower-remedy systems.
Flight medicine see Aviation medicine
The Bach Flower Remedies were ostensibly the only
Floppy mitral valve see Mitral valve system of significance from the 1920s until in the 1970s,
when there was a renewed interest in the subject by doc-
prolapse
tors working in the field of natural medicine. Perhaps the
most notable was Dr. Richard Katz,who was seeking new
methods of dealing with modern stressand the resulting
ailments. He focused on the concept of a psychic,psycho-
logical effect and chose to pursue this line of research.
Flower remedies
In 1979,Katz founded the Flower Essence Society
in California,(FES). This society pledged to further the
Definition
research and development of Bach’s principles. As of
Flower remedies are specially prepared flower 2000,FES hosts a database of over 100 flower essences
essences,containing the healing energy of plants. They from more than 50 countries. FES is now an international
are prescribed according to a patient’s emotional disposi- organization of health practitioners, researchers, stu-
tion,as ascertained by the therapist,doctor,or patients dents,and others concerned with flower essence therapy.
themselves.
The Society has connections with an estimated
50,000 active practitioners from around the world,who
Purpose use flower essence therapy as part of their treatment. FES
encourages the study of the plants themselves to deter-
Flower remedies are more homeopathic than herbal
mine the characteristics of flower essences. They are
in the way they work,effecting energy levels rather than
compiling an extensive database of case studies and prac-
chemical balances. They have been described as “liquid
titioner reports of the use of essences therapeutically,
energy.”The theory is that they encapsulate the flowers’
allowing verification and development of the original
healing energy,and are said to deal with and overcome
definitions. They are also engaged in the scientific study
negative emotions,and so relieve blockages in the flow
of flower essence therapy.
of human energy that can cause illness.
FES says they have developed the theories of Paracel-
sus and Goethe who researched the “signatures”and “ges-
Description
tures” of botanical specimens, on the premise that the
Origins human body and soul are a reflection of the system of
nature. FES plant research interprets the therapeutic prop-
Perhaps the most famous and widely used system is
erties of flower essences according to these insights.
the Bach flower remedies. This system originated in the
1920s when British physician and bacteriologist, Dr. In this regard, they have devised 12 “windows of
Edward Bach (1886–1936), noticed that patients with perception”for monitoring the attributes of plants. Each
physical complaints often seemed to be suffering from of these windows reveals an aspect of the plant’s quali-
anxietyor some kind of negative emotion. He concluded ties,although they maintain that what they are seeking is
that assessing a patient’s emotional disposition and pre- a “whole which is greater than the sum of its parts.”The
scribing an appropriate flower essence could treat the 12 windows are not considered independent classifica-
physical illness. Bach was a qualified medical doctor,but tions, but more of a blended tapestry of views of the
he also practiced homeopathy. qualities that each plant possesses.
As a result of his own serious illness in 1917,Bach The first window is concerned with the “form”of a
began a search for a new and simple system of medicine plant—its shape classification. The second focuses on its
that would treat the whole person. In 1930,he gave up his “gesture”or spatial relationship. The third window is a
flourishing practice on Harley Street at the Royal London plant’s botanical classification; the Flower Essence Soci-
Homeopathic Hospital and moved to the countryside to ety maintains that considering a plant’s botanical family
1338 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
seidemer
rewolF
is essential to obtaining an overview of its properties as a
flower essence. The fourth window concerns the time ori- EDWARD BACH (1886–1936)
entation of a particular specimen regarding the daily and
seasonal cycles. Why do some flowers bloom at different Edward Bach was a graduate of University College
times of the day,while others,such as the evening prim- Hospital (M.B., B.S., M.R.C.S.) in England. He left his
rose,respond to the moon? The fifth window observes a flourishing Harley Street practice in favor of homeopa-
plant’s relationship to its environment. Where a plant thy, seeking a more natural system of healing than allo-
chooses to grow, and where it cannot survive, reveals pathic medicine. He concluded that healing should be
much about its qualities. The sixth window observes a as simple and natural as the development of plants,
which were nourished and given healing properties by
plant’s relationship to the Four Elements and the Four
earth, air, water, and sun.
Ethers,as FES maintains that plants exist in one of the
elemental or etheric forces in addition to their physical Bach believed that he could sense the individual
life. “Elements”refers to those developed by the Greeks, healing properties of flowers by placing his hands over
the petals. His remedies were prepared by floating sum-
as opposed to the modern concept of “molecular building
mer flowers in a bowl of clear stream water exposed to
blocks.”It seems that commonly,two elements predomi-
sunlight for three hours.
nate in a plant, indicating a polarity of qualities, while
two can be said to be recessive. The seventh window He developed 38 remedies, one for each of the
negative states of mind suffered by human beings,
relates to a plant’s relationship with the other kingdoms of
which he classified under seven group headings: fear,
nature: mineral, animal and human, while the eighth
uncertainty, insufficient interest in present circum-
relates to the color and color variations of a plant. Katz
stances, loneliness, over-sensitivity to influences and
explains how the language of color tells us so much about
ideas, despondency or despair, and overcare for the
the “soul qualities”of a plant. The ninth window concerns
welfare of others. The Bach remedies can be prescribed
all other sensory perceptions of a plant,such as fragrance, for plants, animals, and other living creatures as well as
texture,and taste. The tenth window involves assessing human beings.
the chemical substances and properties; the eleventh stud-
ies medicinal and herbal uses,as by studying the physical
healing properties of plants, we can also understand
something of their more subtle effects on the soul. Finally, •aspen:feelings of apprehension,dark foreboding,and
the twelfth window involves the study of the lore,mythol- premonitions
ogy,folk wisdom,and spiritual and ritual qualities associ-
•beech:critical,intolerant,picky
ated with a particular plant. Katz relates how in the past,
•centaury:easily comes under the influence of others,
human beings were more in touch with the natural world,
weak willed
and the remnants of this unconscious plant wisdom live
on in the form of folklore,mythology,and so on. •cerato:unsure,no confidence in own judgement,intu-
ition,and seeks approval from others
Because flower remedies operate on approximately
the same principles as homeopathy, practitioners quite •cherry plum:phobic,fear of being out of control,and
often prescribe the two therapies in conjunction with tension
each other. They can also be used concurrently with allo- •chestnut bud: repeats mistakes, does not learn from
pathic medicine. experience
The system consists of 38 remedies,each for a dif- •chicory:self–centered,possessive,clingy,demanding,
ferent disposition. The basic theory is that if the remedy self pity
for the correct disposition is chosen,the physical illness
•clematis:absent minded,dreamy,apathetic,and lack of
resulting from the present emotional state can then be
connection with reality
cured. There is a rescue remedy made up of five of the
•crab apple:a “cleanser”for prudishness,self–disgust,
essences—cherry plum, clematis, impatiens, rock star,
feeling unclean
and star of Bethlehem—that is recommended for the
treatment of any kind of physical or emotional shock. •elm:a sense of being temporarily overwhelmed in peo-
Therapists recommended that rescue remedy be kept on ple who are usually capable and in control
hand to help with all emergencies.
•gentian:discouraged,doubting,despondent
The 38 Bach Remedies •gorse:feelings of pessimism,accepting defeat
•agrimony:puts on a cheerful front,hides true feelings, •heather:need for company,talks about self,and con-
and worries or problems centrates on own problems
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1339
Flower
remedies
•holly:jealousy,envy,suspicion,anger,and hatred
•honeysuckle:reluctance to enter the present and let the
past go
•hornbeam: reluctant to face a new day, weary, can’t
cope (mental fatigue)
•impatiens:impatience,always in a hurry,and resentful
of constraints
•larch:feelings of inadequacy and apprehension,lack of
confidence and will to succeed
•mimulus:fearful of specific things,shy,and timid
•mustard:beset by “dark cloud”and gloom for no appar-
ent reason
•oak:courageous,persevering,naturally strong but tem-
porarily overcome by difficulties
•olive: for physical and mental renewal, to overcome
exhaustion from problems of long–standing
•pine:for self–reproach,always apologizing,assuming
guilt
•red chestnut:constant worry and concern for others
•rock rose:panic,intense alarm,dread,horror
•rock water:rigid–minded,self–denial,restriction
•scleranthus:indecision,uncertainty,fluctuating moods
•star of Bethlehem:consoling,following shock or grief
or serious news
•sweet chestnut:desolation,despair,bleak outlook
•vervain:insistent,fanatical,over–enthusiastic
•vine:dominating,overbearing,autocratic,tyrannical
•walnut:protects during a period of adjustment or vul-
nerability
•water violet:proud,aloof,reserved,enjoys being alone
•white chestnut: preoccupation with worry, unwanted
thoughts
•wild oat:drifting,lack of direction in life produce “mother tinctures”and the same two methods
devised by Bach are still used today. Flower essences do
•wild rose:apathy,resignation,no point in life
not contain any artificial chemical substances,except for
•willow bitter:resentful,dissatisfied,feeling life is unfair
alcohol preservative.
Originally, Bach collected the dew from chosen
Bach remedies cost around $10 each,and there is no
flowers by hand to provide his patients with the required
set time limit for treatment. It may take days,weeks,or in
remedy. This became impractical when his treatment
some cases months. Flower essences cost around $6 each,
became so popular that production could not keep up
and there is also no set time for the length of treatment,or
with demand. He then set about finding a way to manu-
the amount of essences that may be taken. These treat-
facture the remedies,and found that floating the freshly
ments are not generally covered by medical insurance.
picked petals on the surface of spring water in a glass
bowl and leaving them in strong sunlight for three hours
Precautions
produced the desired effect. Therapists explain that the
water is “potentized”by the essence of the flowers. The Bach remedies and flower essences are not difficult
potentized water can then be bottled and sold. For more to understand,and are considered suitable for self admin-
woody specimens,the procedure is to boil them in a ster- istration. The only difficulty may be in finding the cor-
ilized pan of water for 30 minutes. These two methods rect remedy,as it can sometimes be tricky to pinpoint an
1340 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
seidemer
rewolF
Bach Flower Remedies
Name Remedy
Agrimony Upset by arguments, nonconfrontational,
conceals worry and pain
Aspen Fear of the unknown, anxiety, prone to
nightmares, and apprehension
Beech Critical, intolerant, and negative
Centaury Submissive and weak-willed
Cerato Self doubting and overly dependent
Cherry Plum Emotional thoughts and desparation
Chestnut Repeats mistakes and has no hindsight
Chicory Selfish, controlling, attention-seeking, and
possessive
Clematis Absorbed, impractical, and indifferent
Crab Apple Shame and self-loathing
Elm Overwelhmed and feelings of inadequacy
Gentian Negative, doubt, and depression
Gorse Pessimism, hopelessness, and despair
Heather Self-centered and self-absorbed
Holly Jealousy, hatred, suspicion, and envy
Honeysuckle Homesick, living in the past, and nostalgic
Hornbeam Procrastination, fatigue, and mental exhaustion
Impatiens Impatience, irritability, and impulsive
Larch No confidence, inferiority complex, and
despondency
Mimulus Timid, shy, and fear of the unknown
Mustard Sadness and depression of unknown origin
Oak Obstinate, inflexible, and overachieving
Olive Exhaustion
Pine Guilt and self blame
Red Chesnut Fear and anxiety for loved ones
Rock Rose Nightmares, hysteria, terror, and panic
Rock Water Obsessive, repression, perfectionism, and self
denial
Scleranthus Indecision, low mental clarity, and confusion
Star-of-Bethlehem Grief and distress
Sweet Chesnut Despair and hopelessness
Vervain Overbearing and fanatical
Vine Arrogant, ruthless, and inflexible
Walnut Difficulty accepting change
Water Violet Pride and aloofness
White Chestnut Worry, preoccupation, and unwanted thoughts
Wild Oat Dissatisfaction
Wild Rose Apathy and resignation
Willow Self pity and bitterness
individual’s emotional disposition. They are even safe for
babies, children, and animals. An important aspect of KEY TERMS
treatment with flower remedies,is that if you feel instinc-
tively that you need a particular remedy,you are encour- Aura—Emanation of light from living things
aged to act on that instinct. However,it is advisable not (plants and animals) that can be recorded by Kir-
to continue a particular remedy once you feel you no lian photography.
longer need it,and to try a different one if you feel that
Essence—The constituent of a plant that deter-
progress is not being made.
mines its characteristics.
The remedies are administered from a stoppered
Potentize—The process of transferring the healing
bottle and need to be diluted. Individuals sensitive to
energy of a plant into spring water.
alcohol can apply the concentrate directly to temples,
wrists, behind the ears, or underarms. They should be Window—A perspective adopted to assess the
kept in a cool dark place; like this they should last indef- property of a given plant.
initely. However, a diluted remedy should not be kept
longer than three weeks. Two drops of each diluted rem-
edy should be taken four times a day, including first
thing in the morning and last thing at night. If the rescue patients for such treatments on the strength of personal con-
remedy is being used,four drops should be used instead. viction. However,it is difficult to discount the scores of tes-
Most therapists recommend that they be taken in spring timonials. Some practitioners refer skeptics to the research
water,but the remedy can be taken directly from the bot- that has been done regarding the “auras”of living things.
tle,if care is taken that the dropper does not touch the Theoretically,the stronger the aura,the more alive an organ-
tongue,as this would introduce bacteria that would spoil ism is. Flower essences have very strong auras.
the remedy.
It is not recommended that more than six or seven Resources
Bach remedies be used at any one time. Instead, it is
BOOKS
preferable to divide a larger amount up into two lots to Bach,Edward. Heal Thyself.Essex,UK:C.W. Daniel Compa-
ensure the optimum effectiveness of the remedies. No ny,Ltd.,1931.
combination,or amount of combinations of the remedies Drury,N. Bach Flower Remedies.New York:Sterling,1989.
can cause any harm,rather they become less effective. Kaslof,Leslie. The Traditional Flower Remedies of Dr.
Edward Bach.New Canaan,CT:Keats,1993
Unlike FES, the Bach Centre does not encourage
Somerville,R. Flower RemediesNew York:Time-Life Books.
research to “prove” that the remedies work, preferring
Vlannis,Gregory. Flowers to the Rescue.New York:Thorras,1986.
that people find out for themselves. They strive to keep
the use of the Bach remedies as simple as possible,and ORGANIZATIONS
to this end they do not keep case records. Bach warned The Dr. Edward Bach Centre,Mount. Vernon,Bakers Lane,
Sotwell,Oxon,OX10 OPX,UK. <centre@bachcentre.
before he died that others would try to change his work
com>. <http://www.bachcentre.com>.
and make it more complicated. He was determined to
The Flower Essence Society. P.O. Box 459,Nevada City,CA
keep it simple so that anyone could use it,and that is why
95959. (800) 736-9222. Fax:(530) 265-0584. <mail@
he limited the system to only 38 remedies. The Centre
flowersociety.org>. <http://www.flowersociety.org>.
points out that many who have used Bach’s research as a
starting point have added other remedies to the list,even Patricia Skinner
some that Bach himself rejected.
Flu see Influenza
Side effects Flucona see Antifungal drugs, systemic
Flower remedies or essences are generally regarded as
being totally safe,and there are no known side effects apart
from the rare appearance of a slight rash,which is not a rea-
son to discontinue treatment,says the Bach Centre.
Fluke infections
Research and general acceptance
Definition
Bach flower remedies and flower essences have not yet
officially won the support of allopathic medicine,despite Fluke infections are diseases of the digestive tract
the fact that more and more medical doctors are referring and other organ systems caused by several different
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1341
Fluke
infections
Causes and symptoms
The symptoms of fluke infection differ somewhat
according to the type of fluke involved. All forms of liver
and lung fluke infection, however, have the following
characteristics:
•most persons who get infected do not develop symp-
toms (asymptomatic)
•the early symptoms of an acute fluke infection are not
unique to these diseases alone (nonspecific symptoms)
•infection does not confer immunity against re-infection
by the same species or infection by other species of
flukes
•infection is usually associated with eating uncooked
fish,plants,or animals that live in fresh water
Fascioliasis
Fascioliasis is caused by Fasciola hepatica, the
sheep liver fluke. The fluke has a three-part life cycle that
begins when eggs from a host’s feces are deposited in
water. The eggs release free-swimming larvae
(miracidia) that infect snails. The snails then release free-
swimming larvae with tails (cercariae) that form cysts
containing larvae in the infective stage (metacercariae)
species of parasitic flatworms (Trematodes) that have
on vegetation growing in fresh water. Humans become
complex life cycles involving hosts other than human
infected when they eat watercress, water chestnuts, or
beings. Trematode comes from a Greek word that means
other plants covered with the encysted metacercariae.
having holes and refers to the external suckers that adult
When a person eats contaminated plants,the cysts
flukes use to draw nourishment from their hosts. Fluke
are broken open in the digestive system,and the metacer-
infections are contracted by eating uncooked fish,plants,
cariae leave their cysts, pass through the wall of the
or animals from fluke-infected waters. Symptoms vary
intestine,and enter the liver,where they cause inflamma-
according to the type of fluke infection.
tion and destroy tissue. After a period of 10–15 weeks in
the liver,the adult flukes move to the bile ducts and pro-
Description duce eggs. Acute fascioliasis is marked by abdominal
painwith headache,loss of appetite,anemia,and vomit-
In humans,fluke infections can be classified accord-
ing. Some patients develop hives,muscle pains,or a yel-
ing to those diseases caused by liver flukes and those
low-color to the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice).
caused by lung flukes. Diseases caused by liver flukes
Chronic forms of the disease may produce complica-
include fascioliasis, opisthorchiasis, and clonorchiasis.
tions,including blockage of the bile ducts or the migra-
Cases of liver fluke infection have been reported in Europe
tion of adult flukes to other parts of the body.
and the United States,as well as the Middle East,China,
Japan,and Africa. Diseases caused by lung flukes include
paragonimiasis. Paragonimiasis is a common infection in Opisthorchiasis and clonorchiasis
the Far East, Southeast Asia,Africa, Central and South
These infections are caused by Clonorchis sinensis,
America,Indonesia,and the Pacific Islands. It is estimated
the Chinese liver fluke,and Opisthorchis viverrinior O.
that between 40 million and 100 million people worldwide
felineus. The diseases are widespread, affecting more
suffer from either liver or lung fluke infections.
than 20 million people in Japan,China,Southeast Asia,
In their adult stage, liver and lung flukes are sym- and India. The life cycle of these liver flukes is similar to
metrical in shape, ranging between 1/4–1 in in length, that of F. hepaticaexcept that the etacercariae are encyst-
and look somewhat like long,plump leaves or blades of ed in freshwater fish rather than on plants. Dogs, cats,
grass. They enter through the mouth and can infect any and other mammals that eat raw fish can be infected with
person at any age. opisthorchiasis and clonorchiasis.
1342 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoitcefni
ekulF
A micrograph of adult intestinal blood flukes,Schistosoma
mansoni.Humans can become infected while bathing or
working in contaminated water.(Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Aspirator—A medical instrument that uses suction Host—The living animal that supplies nutrition to a
to withdraw fluids from the lungs, digestive tract, or parasite.
other parts of the body for laboratory testing.
Jaundice—Yellowing of the skin and the whites of
Asymptomatic—Persons who carry a disease and
the eyes as a result of excess bile in the blood due
are usually capable of transmitting the disease but,
to an improperly functioning liver.
who do not exhibit symptoms of the disease are
said to be asymptomatic. Metacercaria (plural, metacercariae)—The encyst-
Cercaria (plural, cercariae)—An intermediate-stage of ed stage of a fluke larva that produces infection in
the fluke larva, released into water by infected snails. human beings.
Cross-reaction—A reaction that occurs in blood Miracidium (plural, miracidia)—The free-swim-
testing when a disease agent reacts to the specific ming larval form in the life cycle of the liver fluke.
antibody for another disease agent. Cross-reactions
are common in blood tests for fluke infections Parasite—An organism that lives on or inside an
because the different species are closely related. animal of a different species and feeds on it or
draws nutrients from it.
Encysted—Enclosed in a cyst or capsule. Flukes
spend part of their life cycle as encysted larvae.
Trematode—Parasitic flatworms or another name
Fluke—A parasitic flatworm that has external suck- for fluke, taken from a Greek word that means hav-
ers. Flukes are sometimes called trematodes. ing holes.
The symptoms of opisthorchiasis and clonorchiasis are beginning of the infection and the appearance of the eggs
similar to those of fascioliasis and include both acute and during coughing is about six weeks. Patients with lung
chronic forms. In acute infection,the patient may be tired, infections may have chest pain and fever as well as rust-
have a low-grade fever,pains in the joints,a swollen liver, colored or bloody sputum. Lung infections can lead to
abdominal pain,and a skin rash. The acute syndrome may lung abscess,pneumonia,or bronchitis. Patients with
be difficult to diagnose because the fluke eggs do not appear fluke infections of the brain may experience seizures or a
in the patient’s stool for three to four weeks after infection. fatal inflammation of brain tissue called encephalitis.
Patients with the chronic form of the disease experience a Some patients also develop diarrhea and abdominal pain
loss of appetite,fatigue,low-grade fever,diarrhea,and an or lumps under the skin that contain adult flukes.
enlarged liver that feels sore when the abdomen is pressed.
Diagnosis
Paragonimiasis
Diagnosis of fluke infections is based on a combina-
Paragonimiasis is caused by a lung fluke, either
tion of the patient’s history, particularly travel or resi-
Paragonimus westermanior P. skrjabini. These flukes are
dence in areas known to have flukes,and identification of
larger than liver flukes and infect meat- or fish-eating ani-
the fluke’s eggs or adult forms. In some patients,the eggs
mals as well as humans. Their life cycle is similar to that
are found in fluid from the lungs, bile duct, or small
of liver flukes except that their encysted larvae infect crabs
intestine. Samples of these fluids can be obtained with a
and crayfish rather than plants or fish. Humans can ingest
suction instrument (aspirator). Because most types of
the encysted metacercariae from drinking contaminated
fluke infections are rare in the United States,stool speci-
water or eating raw or undercooked crabs and crayfish.
mens or body fluid samples may need to be sent to a lab-
In humans,the metacercariae are released from their oratory with experts in unusual diseases or conditions to
cysts in the small intestine and migrate to the lungs or the identify the specific parasite. In some cases,adult flukes
brain in 1% of cases. In the lungs, the flukes lay their may be found in the patient’s stools,vomit,sputum,or
eggs and form areas of inflammation covered with a thin skin lumps (for lung flukes). In the case of lung flukes,it
layer of fibrous tissue. These areas of infection may is important for the doctor to rule out tuberculosisas a
eventually rupture,causing the patient to coughup fluke possible diagnosis. A tuberculosis skin test and chest x
eggs,blood,and inflamed tissue. The period between the raywill usually be sufficient to do this.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1343
Fluke
infections
Blood tests may be useful in diagnosing fluke Resources
infections, but their usefulness is limited because of
BOOKS
cross-reactions. A cross-reaction occurs in blood testing
Goldsmith,Robert S. “Infectious Diseases:Protozoal &
when a particular disease agent reacts with antibodies
Helminthic.”Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,
specific to another disease agent. This result means that
1998.37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:
the doctor may know that the person is infected by Appleton & Lange,1997.
flukes but cannot tell from the blood test alone which Houston,Stan,and Kinga Kowalewska-Grochowska. “Other
specific type of fluke is causing the disease. In addition, Trematodes.”In Current Diagnosis.Vol. 9. Ed. Rex B.
blood tests for fluke infections cannot distinguish Conn,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1997.
between past and current infections. In some cases, Howell,M. J. “Fascioliasis.”In Encyclopedia of Immunology.
sophisticated imaging techniques, such as computed Vol. 3. Ed. Ivan M. Roitt and Peter J. Delves. London:
Academic Press,1992.
tomography scans (CT scans) or ultrasound scans of
Phillips,Elizabeth,and Jay S. Keystone. “Intestinal Parasites.”
the patient’s chest or brain (for lung flukes) or abdomen
In Conn’s Current Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E. Rakel.
(for liver flukes),are useful in confirming a diagnosis
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
of fluke infection.
“Praziquantel.”In Nurses Drug Guide 1995,ed. Billie Ann
Wilson,et al. Norwalk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1995.
Sirisinha,Stitaya. “Opisthorchiasis-Clonorchiasis.”In Encyclo-
Treatment
pedia of Immunology.Vol. 3. Ed. Ivan M. Roitt and Peter
Liver and lung fluke infections are treated with med- J. Delves. London:Academic Press,1992.
ications. These include triclabendazole, praziquantel, Weinberg,Adriana,and Myron J. Levin. “Infections:Parasitic
bithionol,albendazole,and mebendazole. Praziquantel & Mycotic.”In Current Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment,
works by paralyzing the flukes’suckers,forcing them to ed. William W. Hay Jr.,et al. Stamford:Appleton &
Lange,1997.
drop away from the walls of the host’s blood vessels. In
the United States, bithionol is available only from the
Rebecca J. Frey
Centers for Disease Control (CDC). Depending on the
species of fluke and the severity of infection,the course
of treatment can vary from several days to several weeks.
Cure rates vary from 50–95%. Most patients experience
mild temporary side effects from these drugs,including
diarrhea,dizziness,or headache. Fluoroquinolones
Definition
Prognosis
Fluoroquinolones are medicines that kill bacteria or
The prognosis for recovery from liver fluke infec- prevent their growth.
tions is good,although patients with serious infections
may be more vulnerable to other diseases,particularly if
Purpose
significant liver damage has occurred. Most patients with
lung fluke infections also recover,however,severe infec- Fluoroquinolones are antibiotics,medicines used to
tions of the brain can cause deathfrom the destruction of treat infections caused by microorganisms. Physicians
central nervous system or brain tissue. prescribe these drugs for bacterial infections in many
parts of the body. For example, they are used to treat
bone and joint infections,skin infections,urinary tract
Prevention
infections, inflammation of the prostate, serious ear
No vaccines have been developed that are effective infections,bronchitis,pneumonia,tuberculosis,some
against lung or liver fluke infections. Prevention of these sexually transmitted diseases(STD),and some infec-
infections includes the following measures: tions that affect people with AIDS.
•boiling or purifying drinking water
•avoiding raw or undercooked fish or salads made from Description
fresh aquatic plants; all food eaten in areas with fluke
Fluoroquinolones are available only with a physi-
infestations should be cooked thoroughly; pickling or
cian’s prescription and are sold in tablet and injectable
smokingwill not kill fluke cysts in fish or shellfish
forms. Examples of these medicines are moxifloxacin
•control or eradication of the snails that serve as the (Avelox),ciprofloxacin (Cipro),ofloxacin (Floxin),lev-
flukes’intermediate hosts ofloxacin (Levaquin), lomefloxacin (Maxaquin), nor-
1344 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
senoloniuqoroulF
floxacin (Noroxin), enoxacin (Penetrex), gatifloxacin
(Tequin),and sparfloxacin (Zagam). KEY TERMS
Recommended dosage Bacteria—Tiny, one-celled forms of life that cause
many diseases and infections.
The recommended dosage depends on the type and
Bronchitis—Inflammation of the air passages of
strength of fluoroquinolone,and the kind of infection for
the lungs.
which it is being taken. Check with the physician who
prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the pre- Digestive tract—The stomach, intestines, and
scription for the correct dosage. other parts of the body through which food passes.
To make sure the infection clears up completely, Inflammation—Pain, redness, swelling, and heat
take the medicine for as long as it has been prescribed. that usually develop in response to injury or illness.
Do not stop taking the drug just because symptoms begin
Microorganism—An organism that is too small to
to improve. Symptoms may return if the drug is stopped
be seen with the naked eye.
too soon.
Pneumonia—A disease in which the lungs
Fluoroquinolones work best when they are at con-
become inflamed. Pneumonia may be caused by
stant levels in the blood. To help keep levels constant,
bacteria, viruses, or other organisms, or by physi-
take the medicine in doses spaced evenly through the day
cal or chemical irritants.
and night. Do not miss any doses. For best results,take
Prostate—A donut-shaped gland in males below
this medicine with a full glass of water and drink several
the bladder that contributes to the production of
more glasses throughout the day,every day during treat-
semen.
ment with the drug. The extra water will help prevent
some side effects. Some fluoroquinolones should be Sexually transmitted disease (STD)—A disease that
taken on an empty stomach; others may be taken with is passed from one person to another through sexu-
meals. Check package directions or ask the physician or al intercourse or other intimate sexual contact.
pharmacist for instructions on how to take the medicine.
Tendon—A tough band of tissue that connects
muscle to bone.
Precautions
Tuberculosis—An infectious disease that usually
Research suggests that fluoroquinolones may cause affects the lungs, but may also affect other parts of
bone development problems in children and teenagers. the body. Symptoms include fever, weight loss,
Infants, children, teenagers, pregnant women, and and coughing up blood.
women who are breastfeeding should not take this medi-
Urinary tract—The passage through which urine
cine unless directed to do so by a physician.
flows from the kidneys out of the body.
Although such side effects are rare, some people
have had severe and life-threatening reactions to fluoro-
quinolones. Call a physician immediately if any of these
signs of a dangerous reaction occur: the tendons are damaged. If the tendons are torn,surgery
may be necessary to repair them.
•swelling of the face and throat
These medicines make some people feel drowsy,
•swallowing problems
dizzy,lightheaded,or less alert. Anyone who takes these
•shortness of breath
drugs should not drive,use machines or do anything else
•rapid heartbeat that might be dangerous until they have found out how
the drugs affect them.
•tingling of fingers or toes
This medicine may increase sensitivity to sunlight.
•itchingor hives
Even brief exposure to sun can cause a severe sunburn
•loss of consciousness
or a rash. While being treated with fluoroquinolones,
Some fluoroquinolones may weaken the tendons in avoid being in direct sunlight,especially between 10 A.M.
the shoulder, hand, or heel, making the tendons more and 3 P.M.; wear a hat and tightly woven clothing that
likely to tear. Anyone who notices painor inflammation covers the arms and legs; use a sunscreen with a skin
in these or other tendon areas should stop taking the protection factor (SPF) of at least 15; protect the lips
medicine immediately and call a physician. Rest and with a sun block lipstick; and do not use tanning beds,
avoid exercise until the physician determines whether tanning booths,or sunlamps.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1345
Fluoroquinolones
Do not take antacidsthat contain aluminum,calci- •pain in the calves,spreading to the heels
um,or magnesium at the same time as fluoroquinolones.
•swelling of the calves or lower legs
The antacids may keep the fluoroquinolones from work-
•swelling of the face or neck
ing as they should. If antacids are needed,take them at
least two hours before or two hours after taking nor- •swallowing problems
floxacin or ofloxacin,at least four hours before or two
•rapid heartbeat
hours after taking ciprofloxacin. Follow the same
•shortness of breath
instructions for taking sucralfate (Carafate),a medicine
used to treat stomach ulcers and other irritation in the •loss of consciousness
digestive tract and mouth.
Other rare side effects may occur. Anyone who has
Anyone who has had unusual reactions to fluoro- unusual symptoms after taking fluoroquinolones should
quinolones or related medicines such as cinoxacin get in touch with his or her physician.
(Cinobac) or nalidixic acid (NegGram) in the past should
let his or her physician know before taking the drugs
Interactions
again. The physician should also be told about any aller-
giesto foods,dyes,preservatives,or other substances. Fluoroquinolones may interact with other medi-
cines. When this happens,the effects of one or both of
Before using fluoroquinolones,people with any of
the drugs may change or the risk of side effects may be
these medical problems should make sure their physi-
greater. Anyone who takes fluoroquinolones should let
cians are aware of their conditions:
the physician know all other medicines he or she is tak-
•kidney disease ing. Among the drugs that may interact with fluoro-
•liver disease with kidney disease quinolones are:
•diseases of the brain or spinal cord,including harden- •antacids that contain aluminum,calcium,or magnesium
ing of the arteries in the brain, epilepsy, and other •medicines that contain iron or zinc,including multivita-
seizure disorders min and mineral supplements
Taking fluoroquinolones with certain other drugs •sucralfate (Carafate)
may affect the way the drugs work or may increase the
•caffeine
chance of side effects.
•blood thinning drugs such as warfarin (Coumadin)
Side effects
•airway opening drugs (bronchodilators) such as amino-
phylline,theophylline (Theo-Dur and other brands),and
The most common side effects are mild diarrhea, oxtriphylline (choledyl and other brands)
nausea,vomiting,stomach or abdominal pain,dizziness,
•didanosine (Videx),used to treat HIV infection.
drowsiness, lightheadedness, nervousness, sleep prob-
lems,and headache. These problems usually go away as The list above does not include every drug that may
the body adjusts to the drug and do not require medical interact with fluoroquinolones. Be sure to check with a
treatment unless they are bothersome. physician or pharmacist before combining fluoro-
quinolones with any other prescription or nonprescrip-
More serious side effects are not common,but may
tion (over-the-counter) medicine.
occur. If any of the following side effects occur,check
with a physician immediately:
Resources
•skin rash or other skin problems such as itching,peel-
ing,hives,or redness OTHER
“Fluoroquinolones (Systemic).”National Library of medicine.
•fever
<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/
•agitation or confusion fluoroquinolonessystemic202656.html>.
•hallucinations
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt
•shakiness or tremors
Fluoxetine see Selective serotonin reuptake
•seizures or convulsions
inhibitors
•tingling of fingers or toes
Flurbiprofen see Nonsteroidal anti-
•pain where the medicine was injected (lasting after the
injection) inflammatory drugs
1346 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
senoloniuqoroulF
Focal glomeruloscle see Nephrotic these diseases. High levels of homocysteine have also
syndrome
been found to contribute to problems with osteoporosis.
Folic acid,together with vitamins B and B ,helps break
6 12
down homocysteine,and may help reverse the problems
associated with elevated levels.
Pregnant women have an increased need for folic
acid, both for themselves and their child. Folic acid is
Folic acid
necessary for the proper growth and development of the
Definition fetus. Adequate intake of folic acid is vital for the pre-
vention of several types of birth defects, particularly
Folic acid is a water-soluable vitamin belonging to the
NTDs. The neural tube of the embryo develops into the
B-complex group of vitamins. These vitamins help the
brain, spinal cord, spinal column, and the skull. If this
body break down complex carbohydrates into simple sug-
tube forms incompletely during the first few months of
ars to be used for energy. Excess B vitamins are excreted
pregnancy a serious, and often fatal, defect results in
from the body rather than stored for later use. This is why
spina bifidaor anencephaly. Folic acid,taken from one
sufficient daily intake of folic acid is necessary.
year to one month before conception through the first
four months of pregnancy,can reduce the risk of NTDs
Description by 50–70%. It also helps prevent a cleft lip and palate.
Folic acid is also known as folate, or folacin. It is Research shows that folic acid can be used to suc-
one of the nutrients most often found to be deficient in cessfully treat cervical dysplasia,a condition diagnosed
the Western diet,and there is evidence that deficiency is by a Pap smear,of having abnormal cells in the cervix.
a problem on a worldwide scale. Folic acid is found in This condition is considered to be a possible precursor to
leafy green vegetables, beans, peas and lentils, liver, cervical cancer, and is diagnosed as an abnormal Pap
beets, brussel sprouts, poultry, nutritional yeast, tuna, smear. Daily consumption of 1,000 mcg of folic acid for
wheat germ,mushrooms,oranges,asparagus,broccoli, three or more months has resulted in improved cervical
spinach,bananas,strawberries,and cantaloupes. In 1998, cells upon repeat Pap smears.
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) required Studies suggest that long-term use of folic acid sup-
food manufacturers to add folic acid to enriched bread plements may also help prevent lung and colon cancer.
and grain products to boost intake and to help prevent Researchers have also found that alcoholics who have
neural tube defects (NTD). low folic acid levels face a greatly increased possibility
of developing colon cancer.
Purpose
Folic acid works together with vitamin B and vita- Preparations
12
min C to metabolize protein in the body. It is important
To correct a folic acid deficiency,supplements are
for the formation of red and white blood cells. It is neces-
taken in addition to food. Since the functioning of the B
sary for the proper differentiation and growth of cells and
vitamins is interrelated,it is generally recommended that
for the development of the fetus. It is also used to form
the appropriate dose of B-complex vitamins be taken in
the nucleic acid of DNA and RNA. It increases the
place of single B vitamin supplements. The Recom-
appetite and stimulates the production of stomach acid
mended Dietary Allowances (RDA) for folate is 400 mcg
for digestion and it aids in maintaining a healthy liver. A
per day for adults,600 mcg per day for pregnant women,
deficiency of folic acid may lead to anemia, in which
and 500 mcg for nursing women. Medicinal dosages of
there is decreased production of red blood cells. This
up to 1,000-2,000 mcg per day may be prescribed.
reduces the amounts of oxygen and nutrients that are able
to get to the tissues. Symptoms may include fatigue,
reduced secretion of digestive acids,confusion,and for- Precautions
getfulness. During pregnancy, a folic acid deficiency
Folic acid is not stable. It is easily destroyed by
may lead to preeclampsia,premature birth,and increased
exposure to light,air,water,and cooking. Therefore,the
bleeding after birth.
supplement should be stored in a dark container in a
People who are at high risk of strokes and heart dis- cold,dry place,such as a refrigerator. Many medications
ease may greatly benefit by taking folic acid supple- interfere with the body’s absorption and use of folic acid.
ments. An elevated blood level of the amino acid homo- This includes sulfa drugs,sleeping pills,estrogen,anti-
cysteine has been identified as a risk factor for some of convulsants, birth control pills, antacids, quinine, and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1347
Folic
acid
PERIODICALS
KEY TERMS Fallest-Strobl,Patricia,Ph.D.,David Koch,James Stein,and
Patrick McBride. “Homocysteine:A New Risk Factor for
Atherosclerosis.”American Family Physician(October
Homocysteine—An amino aid involved in the
15,1997):1607-14.
breakdown and absorption of protein in the body.
Giovannuci,Edward,et al. “Alcohol,low-methionine-low-
Preeclampsia—A serious disorder of late pregnan- folate diets,and risk of colon cancer in men.”Journal of
cy in which the blood pressure rises, there is a the National Cancer Institute(February 15,1995):265-
large amount of retained fluids, and the kidneys 73.
become less effective and excrete proteins directly Shaw,Gary M.,et al. “Risks of orofacial clefts in children born
to women using multivitamins containing folic acid peri-
into the urine.
conceptually.”The Lancet(August 12,1995):393-96.
Raynaud’s disease—A symptom of various under-
ORGANIZATIONS
lying conditions affecting blood circulation in the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 4770 Buford
fingers and toes and causing them to be sensitive
Highway NE,MSF-45,Atlanta,GA 30341-3724.
to cold.
(888)232-6789. Flo@cdc.gov. <http://www.cdc.gov/
Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA)—Guide- nceh/programs/cddh/folic/folicfaqs.htm>.
lines for the amounts of vitamins and minerals nec-
OTHER
essary for proper health and nutrition established
Adams,Suzanne L. The Art of Cytology:Folic Acid/ B-12 Defi-
by the National Academy of Sciences in 1989.
ciencysuzann@concetric.net. <http://www.concentric.
Water-soluble vitamins—Vitamins that are not net/~Suza2/page22.htm>.
stored in the body and are easily excreted. They “Folic Acid.”<http://www.cybervitamins.com/folicacid.htm>.
must, therefore, be consumed regularly as foods or “Folic Acid:Coming to A Grocery Store Near You.”<http://
www.mayohealth.org/mayo/9710/htm/folic.htm>.
supplements to maintain health.
“Folic acid (oral/injectible).”Dr. Koop.com.Inc. 700 N. Mopac,
Suite 400,Austin,TX 48731. <http://www.drkoop.com/hcr/
drugstore/pharmacy/leaflets/english/d00241a1.asp.
Pregnancy and Nutrition Update. <http://www.mayohealth.org/
some antibiotics. Using large amounts of folic acid (e.g.,
mayo/9601/htm/pregvit.htm>.
over 5,000 mcg per day) can mask a vitamin B deficien-
12
cy and thereby risk of irreversible nerve damage. Patience Paradox
Side effects
At levels of 5,000 mcg or less,folic acid is generally
safe for use. Side effects are uncommon. However,large
Folic acid deficiency anemia
doses may cause nausea, decreased appetite, bloating,
gas, decreased ability to concentrate, and insomnia. Definition
Large doses may also decrease the effects of phenytoin
Folic acid deficiency, an abnormally low level of
(Dilantin),a seizure medication.
one of the B vitamins,results in anemia characterized by
red blood cells that are large in size but few in number.
Interactions
As with all B-complex vitamins, it is best to take Description
folic acid with the other B vitamins. Vitamin C is impor-
Folic acid is necessary for growth and cellular
tant to the absorption and functioning of folic acid in the
repair,since it is a critical component of DNA and RNA
body.
as well as essential for the formation and maturation of
red blood cells. Folic acid deficiency is one of the most
Resources common of all vitamin deficiencies. Although it occurs
in both males and females,folic acid deficiency anemia
BOOKS
most often affects women over 30. It becomes increas-
Braverman,Eric R.,M.D.,Carl C. Pfeiffer,M.D.,Ph.D.,Ken
ingly common as age impedes the body’s ability to
Blum,Ph.D.,and Richard Smayda,D.O. The Healing
absorb folic acid,a water-soluble vitamin that is manu-
Nutrients Within.New Canaan,CT:Keats Publishing,1997.
Kirschmann,John D. and Gayla J. Kirschmann. Nutrition factured by intestinal bacteria and stored for a short time
Almanac.New York:McGraw-Hill,1996. in the liver. Folic acid deficiency has also been implicat-
1348 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aimena
ycneicifed
dica
ciloF
ed as a cause of neural tube defects in the developing •paranoia
fetus. Recent research has shown that adequate amounts
•rapid heart beat
of folic acid can prevent up to half of these birth defects,
•sore,inflamed tongue
if women start taking folic acid supplements shortly
before conception. •weakness
A healthy adult needs at least 400 mcg of folic acid •weight loss
every day. Requirements at least double during pregnan-
cy,and increase by 50% when a woman is breastfeeding.
Diagnosis
The average American diet,high in fats,sugar,and white
flour,provides about 200 mcg of folic acid,approximate- Diagnostic procedures include blood tests to mea-
ly the amount needed to maintain tissue stores of the sub- sure hemoglobin,an iron-containing compound that car-
stance for six to nine months before a deficiency devel- ries oxygen to cells throughout the body. Symptoms may
ops. Most of the folic acid in foods (with the exception of be reevaluated after the patient has taken prescription
the folic acid added to enriched flour and breakfast cere- folic acid supplements.
als) occurs as folate. Folate is only about half as available
for the body to use as is the folic acid in pills and supple- Treatment
ments. Folate also is easily destroyed by sunlight,over-
Folic acid supplements are usually prescribed,and
cooking,or the storing of foods at room temperature for
self-care includes avoiding:
an extended period of time.
•alcohol
Good dietary sources of folate include:
•non-herbal tea,antacids,and phosphates (contained in
•leafy green vegetables
beer, ice cream, and soft drinks), which restrict iron
•liver absorption
•mushrooms •tobacco
•oatmeal A person with folic acid deficiency anemia should
•peanut butter rest as often as necessary until restored energy levels
make it possible to resume regular activities. A doctor
•red beans
should be seen if fever, chills, muscle aches, or new
•soy symptoms develop during treatment,or if symptoms do
not improve after two weeks of treatment.
•wheat germ
Alternative treatment
Causes and symptoms
Alternative therapies for folic acid deficiency ane-
This condition usually results from a diet lacking in mia may include reflexologyconcentrated on areas that
foods with high folic acid content, or from the body’s influence the liver and spleen. Increasing consumption of
inability to digest foods or absorb foods having high folic foods high in folate is helpful. Eating a mixture of yogurt
acid content. Other factors that increase the risk of devel- (8 oz) and turmeric (1 tsp) also may help resolve symp-
oping folic acid deficiency anemia are: toms. A physician should be contacted if the tongue
•age becomes slick or smooth or the patient:
•bruises or tires easily
•alcoholism
•feels ill for more than five days
•birth-control pills,anticonvulsant therapy,sulfa antibi-
otics,and certain other medications •feels weak or out of breath
•illness •looks pale or jaundiced
•smoking
Prognosis
•stress
Although adequate folic acid intake usually cures
Fatigueis often the first sign of folic acid deficiency
this condition in about three weeks,folic acid deficiency
anemia. Other symptoms include:
anemia can make patients infertile or more susceptible to
•anorexia nervosa
infection. Severe deficiencies can result in congestive
•pale skin heart failure.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1349
Folic
acid
deficiency
anemia
Prevention ders(such as anovulatory bleeding),to measure hormone
levels in children who enter puberty at an early age,and to
Eating raw or lightly cooked vegetables every day
diagnose other disorders. In men,it can be used to deter-
will help maintain normal folic acid levels,as will taking
mine early puberty,abnormal tissue growth on one or more
a folic acid supplement containing at least 400 mcg of this
of the hormone-secreting (endocrine) glands (called multi-
vitamin. Because folic acid deficiency can cause birth
ple endocrine neoplasia),or to diagnose other disorders.
defects,all women of childbearing age who can become
pregnant should consume at least 400 mcg of folic acid
Description
daily; a woman who is pregnant should have regular med-
ical checkups,and take a good prenatal vitamin. The FSH test is a blood test. Blood will be drawn
from the patient and analyzed in a laboratory.
Resources
Preparation
BOOKS
New Choices in Natural Healing.Ed. Bill Gottlieb,et al. In preparation for the test,there are no food or fluid
Emmaus,PA:Rodale Press,1995. intake restrictions. Patients may be advised to discontinue
Professional Guide to Diseases.5th ed. Springhouse,PA: certain medications for 48 hours before the test. A men-
Springhouse Corporation,1995. struating woman having hot flashes or irregular periods
should be tested on the second or third day of her menstru-
OTHER
al cycle. A woman who has missed a period and is having
“Folic-Acid Deficiency Anemia.”ThriveOnline.6 Apr. 1998
<http://thriveonline.oxygen.com>. other menopausal symptoms can be tested at any time.
“Gastrointestinal Disorders:Malabsorption Syndromes.”The
Meck Page.13 Apr. 1998 <http://www.merck.com>. Aftercare
Maureen Haggerty No aftercare is necessary.
Risks
There are no risks associated with this test.
Follicle-stimulating
Normal results
hormone test
Normal FSH test results vary according to age and
Definition sexual maturity. The phase of a woman’s menstrual cycle
or use of birth-control pills also affects test results.
The follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) test measures
For an adult male,normal results range from about
the amount of FSH in the blood. FSH is a hormone that
4–25 units of FSH in every liter of blood (U/L) or about
regulates the growth and development of eggs and sperm,
5–20 micro-international units in every milliliter.
and this test is used to diagnose or evaluate disorders
involving the pituitary gland and reproductive system. For a premenopausal woman, normal values range
from 4–30 U/L or 5–20 micro-international units per milli-
liter. In a pregnant woman,FSH levels are too low to mea-
Purpose
sure. After menopause,normal values range from 40–250
FSH testing is performed if a physician suspects the
U/L or 50–100 micro-international units per milliliter.
patient may have a disorder involving the reproductive
FSH levels fluctuate during premenopause. If no
system or pituitary gland. The pituitary gland produces
other symptoms are present,an elevated FSH level should
FSH,which stimulates the growth of the sacks (follicles)
not be interpreted as proof that menopause has begun.
that surround the eggs in a woman’s ovaries. This is
important for the process of ovulation,in which the egg
Abnormal results
is released. In men,FSH stimulates production of sperm.
If there are abnormal levels of FSH in the blood it may Anorexia nervosaand disorders of the hypothalamus
mean that one of several disorders are present. Normal or pituitary gland can result in abnormally low FSH levels.
fluctuations occur as a result of puberty,the menstrual
Abnormal levels can also indicate:
cycle,pregnancy,and menopause.
•infertility
The FSH test is performed more often on women than
•hypopituitarism
on men. In women,it is used to determine if menopause
has begun,to diagnose infertilityand menstrual disor- •klinefelter syndrome (in men)
1350 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tset
enomroh
gnitalumits-elcilloF
Description
KEY TERMS
Folliculitis can affect both women and men at any
age. It can develop on any part of the body,but is most
Anovulatory bleeding—Bleeding without release
likely to occur on the scalp, face, or parts of the arms,
of an egg from an ovary.
armpits,or legs not usually covered by clothing.
Hypopituitarism—Underactivity of the pituitary
Small,yellowish-white blister-like lumps (pustules)
gland.
surrounded by narrow red rings are usually present with
Hypothalamus—The part of the brain that controls both bacterial folliculitis and fungal folliculitis. Hair can
the endocrine system. grow through or alongside of the pustules,which some-
times ooze blood-stained pus.
Klinefelter’s syndrome—Chromosomal abnormali-
ty characterized by small testes and male infertility. Folliculitis can cause boils and, in rare instances,
serious skin infections. Bacteria from folliculitis can enter
Multiple endocrine neoplasia—Abnormal tissue
the blood stream and travel to other parts of the body.
growth on one or more of the endocrine (hor-
mone-secreting) glands.
Polycystic ovary disease—A condition in which a Causes and symptoms
woman has little or no menstruation, is infertile,
Folliculitis develops when bacteria,such as Staphy-
has excessive body hair, and is obese. The ovaries
lococcus, or a fungus enters the body through a cut,
may contain several cysts.
scrape,surgical incision,or other break in the skin near a
Turner syndrome—Chromosomal abnormality hair follicle. Scratching the affected area can trap fungus
characterized by immature reproductive organs in or bacteria under the fingernails and spread the infection
women. to hair follicles on other parts of the body.
The bacteria that cause folliculitis are contagious. A
person who has folliculitis can infect others who live in
the same household.
•turner syndrome
Factors that increase the risk of developing folliculi-
•ovarian failure
tis include:
•polycystic ovary syndrome
•dermatitis
Resources •diabetes
•dirty,crowded living conditions
BOOKS
Everything You Need to Know About Medical Tests.Ed. •eczema
Michael Shaw,et al. Springhouse,PA:Springhouse Cor-
•exposure to hot,humid temperatures
poration,1996.
•infection in the nose or other recent illness
OTHER
“Follicle-Stimulating Hormone Test.”ThriveOnline.24 Feb. •tight clothing
1998 <http://thriveonline.oxygen.com>.
“Follicle-Stimulating Hormone Test.”HealthAnswers.com25
Diagnosis
Feb. 1998 <http://www.healthanswers.com>.
Diagnosis is based on the patient’s medical history
Maureen Haggerty
and observations. Laboratory analysis of the substance
drained from a pustule can be used to distinguish bacteri-
Follicular cysts see Ovarian cysts
al folliculitis from fungal folliculitis.
Treatment
Bacterial folliculitis may disappear without treat-
Folliculitis
ment, but is likely to recur. Non-prescription topical
antibiotics like Bacitracin, Mycitracin, or Neomycin,
Definition
gently rubbed on to affected areas three or four times a
Folliculitis is inflammation or infection of one or day,can clear up a small number of bacterial folliculitis
more hair follicles (openings in the skin that enclose hair). pustules. Oral antibiotics such as erythromycin (Ery-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1351
Folliculitis
doses of vitaminsand mineralsshould not be used with-
out a doctor’s approval.
Prognosis
If properly treated,the symptoms of bacterial folli-
culitis generally disappear in about two weeks. Fungal
folliculitis should clear up within six weeks. But it can
worsen if the condition is misdiagnosed and inappropri-
ately treated with steroid creams.
Prevention
Anyone who has a tendency to develop folliculitis
should cleanse the skin with antibacterial soap twice a
day and before shaving and should not use oily skin
lotions. Men should not shave while the beard area is
infected. When they begin shaving again,they should use
a new blade each time. Women who have had fungal fol-
liculitis should use depilatory creams instead of razors.
Daily shampooing can help prevent folliculitis in the
scalp. The spread of infection can be prevented by not
sharing towels or washcloths
thocin) may be prescribed if the infection is widespread.
Resources
The drug griseofulvin (Fulvicin) and topical antifungal
medications are used to treat fungal folliculitis. BOOKS
The Editors of Time-Life Books. The Medical Advisor:The
A doctor should be notified if:
Complete Guide to Alternative and Conventional Treat-
•pustules spread after treatment has begun or reappear ments.Alexandria,VA:Time Life,Inc.,1996.
after treatment is completed
OTHER
•the patient’s feverclimbs above 100°F (37.8°C) “Bacterial folliculitis.”ThriveOnline.5 Apr. 1998 <http://
thriveonline.oxygen.com>.
•the patient develops boils or swollen ankles
“Folliculitis.”ThriveOnline.5 Apr. 1998 <http://thriveon
•redness, swelling, warmth, or pain indicate that the line.oxygen.com>.
infection has spread “Fungal Folliculitis.”ThriveOnline.5 Apr. 1998 <http://
thriveonline.oxygen.com>.
•unexplained new symptoms appear
Maureen Haggerty
Alternative treatment
Foot acupressure see Reflexology
Eating a balanced diet,including protein,complex car-
bohydrates,healthy fats,fresh fruits and vegetables,and
drinking eight to 10 glasses of water a day may stimulate
the body’s immune system and shorten the course of the
infection. Garlic (Allium sativum) and goldenseal
(Hydrastis canadensis),both antiseptic agents against staph Food poisoning
infections, may be taken. The daily dosage would vary
from person to person and is based on the severity of the Definition
infection. Echinacea(Echinacea spp.) is helpful in modu-
Food poisoning is a general term for health prob-
lating immune function. Again,the dosage would vary.
lems arising from eating contaminated food. Food may
Daily doses of 30–50 mg zinc and 1,000–5,000 mg be contaminated by bacteria,viruses,environmental tox-
Vitamin C (taken in equal amounts at several times dur- ins,or toxins present within the food itself,such as the
ing the day),and 300–2,000 mg bioflavinoids can also poisons in some mushrooms or certain seafood. Symp-
strengthen the body’s infection-fighting ability. High toms of food poisoning usually involve nausea,vomiting
1352 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gninosiop
dooF
Acne folliculitis.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by
permission.)
and/or diarrhea. Some food-borne toxins can affect the the bacteria into cooked food. Bacteria flourish at room
nervous system. temperature,and will rapidly grow into quantities capa-
ble of making people sick. To prevent this growth,food
must be kept hot or cold,but never just warm.
Description
Although the food supply in the United States is
Every year millions of people suffer from bouts of
probably the safest in the world, anyone can get food
vomiting and diarrhea each year that they blame on
poisoning. Serious outbreaks are rare. When they occur,
“something I ate.” These people are generally correct.
the very young,the very old,and those with immune sys-
Each year in the United States,one to two bouts of diar-
tem weaknesses have the most severe and life-threaten-
rheal illness occur in every adult. The Centers for Disease
ing cases. For example,this group is 20 times more like-
Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that there are
ly to become infected with the Salmonellabacteria than
from six to 33 million cases of food poisoning in the Unit-
the general population.
ed States annually. Many cases are mild and pass so rapid-
ly that they are never diagnosed. Occasionally a severe Travel outside the United States to countries where
outbreak creates a newsworthy public health hazard. less attention is paid to sanitation,water purification,and
good food handling practices increases the chances that a
Classical food poisoning, sometimes incorrectly
person will get food poisoning. People living in institu-
called ptomaine poisoning,is caused by a variety of dif-
tions such as nursing homes are also more likely to get
ferent bacteria. The most common are Salmonella,
Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli O157:H7 or food poisoning.
other E. coli strains, Shigella, and Clostridium
botulinum. Each has a slightly different incubation peri- Causes and symptoms
od and duration, but all except C. botulinum cause
The symptoms of food poisoning occur because
inflammation of the intestines and diarrhea. Sometimes
food-borne bacteria release toxins or poisons as a
food poisoning is called bacterial gastroenteritis or
byproduct of their growth in the body. These toxins
infectious diarrhea. Food and water can also be contami-
(except those from C. botulinum) cause inflammation
nated by viruses (such as the Norwalk agent that causes
and swelling of the stomach,small intestine and/or large
diarrhea and the viruses of hepatitis Aand E),environ-
intestine. The result is abdominal muscle cramping,
mental toxins (heavy metals), and poisons produced
vomiting, diarrhea, fever, and the chance of dehydra-
within the food itself (mushroom poisoningor fish and
tion. The severity of symptoms depends on the type of
shellfish poisoning).
bacteria,the amount consumed,and the individual’s gen-
Careless food handling during the trip from farm to
eral health and sensitivity to the bacterial toxin.
table creates conditions for the growth of bacteria that
make people sick. Vegetables that are eaten raw,such as let-
Salmonella
tuce,may be contaminated by bacteria in soil,water,and
dust during washing and packing. Home canned and com- According to a 2001 report from the CDC,Salmo-
mercially canned food may be improperly processed at too nellacaused almost 50,000 culture-confirmed cases of
low a temperature or for too short a time to kill the bacteria. food poisoning in the United States annually. However,
between two and four million probably occur each year.
Raw meats carry many food-borne bacterial dis-
Salmonellais found in egg yolks from infected chickens,
eases. The United States Food and Drug Administration
in raw and undercooked poultry and in other meats,dairy
(FDA) estimates that 60% or more of raw poultry sold at
products,fish,shrimp,and many more foods. The CDC
retail carry some disease-causing bacteria. Other raw
estimates that one out of every 50 consumers is exposed
meat products and eggs are contaminated to a lesser
to a contaminated egg yolk each year. However,thorough
degree. Thorough cooking kills the bacteria and makes
cooking kills the bacteria and makes the food harmless.
the food harmless. However,properly cooked food can
Salmonellais also found in the feces of pet reptiles such
become re-contaminated if it comes in contact with
as turtles,lizards,and snakes.
plates,cutting boards,countertops,or utensils that were
used with raw meat and not cleaned and sanitized. About one out of every 1,000 people get food poi-
soning from Salmonella. Of these,two-thirds are under
Cooked foods can also be contaminated after cook-
age 20, with the majority under age nine. Most cases
ing by bacteria carried by food handlers or from bacteria
occur in the warm months between July and October.
in the environment. It is estimated that 50% of healthy
people have the bacteria Staphylococcus aureusin their Symptoms of food poisoning begin eight to 72 hours
nasal passages and throat, and on their skin and hair. after eating food contaminated with Salmonella. These
Rubbing a runny nose,then touching food can introduce include traditional food poisoning symptoms of abdomi-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1353
Food
poisoning
nal pain,diarrhea,vomiting,and fever. The symptoms nellacombined. Anyone can get food poisoning from C.
generally last one to five days. Dehydration can be a jejuni,but children under five and young adults between
complication in severe cases. People generally recover the ages of 15 and 29 are more frequently infected.
without antibiotic treatment,although they may feel tired
C. jejuniis carried by healthy cattle,chickens,birds,
for a week after the active symptoms subside.
and flies. It is not carried by healthy people in the United
States or Europe. The bacteria is also found ponds and
Staphylococcus aureus
stream water. The ingestion of only a few hundred C.
Staphylococcus aureus is found on humans and in jejunibacteria can make a person sick.
the environment in dust,air,and sewage. The bacteria is Symptoms of food poisoning begin two to five days
spread primarily by food handlers using poor sanitary after eating food contaminated with C. jejuni. These
practices. Almost any food can be contaminated, but symptoms include fever, abdominal pain, nausea,
salad dressings,milk products,cream pastries,and any headache,muscle pain,and diarrhea. The diarrhea can
food kept at room temperature,rather than hot or cold are be watery or sticky and may contain blood. Symptoms
likely candidates. last from seven to 10 days,and relapses occur in about
It is difficult to estimate the number of cases of food one quarter of people who are infected. Dehydration is a
poisoning from Staphylococcus aureusthat occur each common complication. Other complications such as
year,because its symptoms are so similar to those caused arthritis-like joint pain and hemolytic-uremic syndrome
by other foodborne bacteria. Many cases are mild and the (HUS) are rare.
victim never sees a doctor.
Symptoms appear rapidly,usually one to six hours Shigella
after the contaminated food is eaten. The acute symp-
Shigellais a common cause of diarrhea in travelers
toms of vomiting and severe abdominal cramps without
to developing countries. It is associated with contaminat-
fever usually last only three to six hours and rarely more
ed food and water,crowded living conditions,and poor
than 24 hours. Most people recover without medical
sanitation. The bacterial toxins affect the small intestine.
assistance. Deaths are rare.
Symptoms of food poisoning by Shigella appear
36–72 hours after eating contaminated food. These symp-
Escherichia coli (E. coli)
toms are slightly different from those associated with most
There are many strains of E. coli,and not all of them foodborne bacteria. In addition to the familiar watery diar-
are harmful. The strain that causes most severe food poi- rhea,nausea,vomiting,abdominal cramps,chills and fever
soning is E. coli O157:H7. Food poisoning by E. coli occur. The diarrhea may be quite severe with cramps pro-
occurs in three out of every 10,000 people. Foodborne E. gressing to classical dysentery. Up to 40% of children with
coliis found and transmitted mainly in food derived from severe infections show neurological symptoms. These
cows such as raw milk,raw or rare ground beef and fruit include seizures caused by fever, confusion, headache,
or vegetables that are contaminated. lethargy,and a stiff neck that resembles meningitis.
Symptoms of food poisoning from E. coliare slower The disease runs its course usually in two to three
to appear than those caused by some of the other food- days but may last longer. Dehydration is a common com-
borne bacteria. E. coliproduces toxins in the large intes- plication. Most people recover on their own, although
tine rather than higher up in the digestive system. This they may feel exhausted,but children who are malnour-
accounts for the delay in symptoms and the fact that ished or have weakened immune systems may die.
vomiting rarely occurs in E. colifood poisoning.
One to three days after eating contaminated food,the Clostridium botulinum (C. botulinum)
victim with E. coli O157:H7begins to have severe abdom-
C. botulinum,which causes both adult botulismand
inal cramps and watery diarrhea that usually becomes
infant botulism,is unlike any of the other foodborne bac-
bloody within 24 hours. There is little or no fever, and
teria. First, C. botulinum is an anaerobic bacterium in
rarely does the victim vomit. The bloody,watery diarrhea
that it can only live in the absence of oxygen. Second,the
lasts from one to eight days in uncomplicated cases.
toxins from C. botulinumare neurotoxins. They poison
the nervous system,causing paralysiswithout the vomit-
Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni)
ing and diarrhea associated with other foodborne illness-
According to the FDA,C. jejuniis the leading cause of es. Third,toxins that cause adult botulism are released
bacterial diarrhea in the United States. It is responsible for when the bacteria grows in an airless environment out-
more cases of bacterial diarrhea than Shigellaand Salmo- side the body. They can be broken down and made harm-
1354 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gninosiop
dooF
less by heat. Finally,botulism is much more likely to be
fatal even in tiny quantities.
Adult botulism outbreaks are usually associated
with home canned food,although occasionally commer-
cially canned or vacuum packed foods are responsible
for the disease. C. botulinumgrows well in non-acidic,
oxygen-free environments. If food is canned at too low
heat or for too brief a time,the bacteria is not killed. It
reproduces inside the can or jar,releasing its deadly neu-
rotoxin. The toxin can be made harmless by heating the
contaminated food to boiling for ten minutes. However,
even a very small amount of the C. botulinumtoxin can
cause serious illness or death.
Symptoms of adult botulism appear about 18–36
hours after the contaminated food is eaten, although
there are documented times of onset ranging from four necessarily the most recent food one has eaten that is the
hours to eight days. Initially a person suffering from bot- cause of the symptoms.
ulism feels weakness and dizzinessfollowed by double
vision. Symptoms progress to difficulty speaking and
Treatment
swallowing. Paralysis moves down the body,and when
Treatment of food poisoning,except that caused by
the respiratory muscles are paralyzed,death results from
C. botulinum, focuses on preventing dehydration by
asphyxiation. People who show any signs of botulism
replacing fluids and electrolytes lost through vomiting
poisoning must receive immediate emergency medical
and diarrhea. Electrolytes are salts and minerals that
care to increase their chance of survival.
form electrically charges particles (ions) in body fluids.
Infant botulism is a form of botulism first recog- Electrolytes are important because they control body
nized in 1976. It differs from food-borne botulism in its fluid balance and are important for all major body reac-
causes and symptoms. Infant botulism occurs when a tions. Pharmacists can recommend effective,pleasant-
child under the age of one year ingests the spores of C. tasting, electrolytically balanced replacement fluids
botulinum. These spores are found in soil, but a more that are available without a prescription. When more
common source of spores is honey. fluids are being lost than can be consumed,dehydration
The C. botulinumspores lodge in the baby’s intesti- may occur. Dehydration more likely to happen in the
nal tract and begin to grow,producing their neurotoxin. very young, the elderly, and people who are taking
Onset of symptoms is gradual. Initially the baby is consti- diuretics. To prevent dehydration, a doctor may give
pated. This is followed by poor feeding,lethargy,weak- fluids intravenously.
ness,drooling,and a distinctive wailing cry. Eventually, In very serious cases of food poisoning,medications
the baby loses the ability to control its head muscles. may be given to stop abdominal cramping and vomiting.
From there the paralysis progresses to the rest of the body. Anti-diarrheal medications are not usually given. Stop-
ping the diarrhea keeps the toxins in the body longer and
Diagnosis may prolong the infection.
People with food poisoning should modify their diet.
One important aspect of diagnosing food poisoning
During period of active vomiting and diarrhea they
is for doctors to determine if a number of people have
should not try to eat and should drink only clear liquids
eaten the same food and show the same symptoms of ill-
frequently but in small quantities. Once active symptoms
ness. When this happens,food poisoning is strongly sus-
stop,they should eat bland,soft,easy to digest foods for
pected. The diagnosis is confirmed when the suspected
two to three days. One example is the BRAT diet of
bacteria is found in a stool cultureor a fecal smear from
bananas,rice,applesauce,and toast,all of which are easy
the person. Other laboratory tests are used to isolate bac-
to digest. Milk products, spicy food, alcohol and fresh
teria from a sample of the contaminated food. Botulism
fruit should be avoided for a few days,although babies
is usually diagnosed from its distinctive neurological
should continue to breastfeed. These modifications are
symptoms,since rapid treatment is essential. Many cases
often all the treatment that is necessary.
of food poisoning go undiagnosed,since a definite diag-
nosis is not necessary to effectively treat the symptoms. Severe bacterial food poisonings are sometimes
Because it takes time for symptoms to develop,it is not treated with antibiotics. Trimethoprim and sulfamethox-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1355
Food
poisoning
Common Pathogens Causing Food Poisoning
Pathogen Common Host(s)
Campylobacter Poultry
E.coli 0157:H7 Undercooked, contaminated ground beef
Listeria Found in a variety of raw foods, such as uncooked
meats and vegetables, and in processed foods that
become contaminated after processing
Salmonella Poultry, eggs, meat, and milk
Shigella This bacteria is transmitted through direct contact
with an infected person or from food or water that
become contaminated by an infected person
Vibrio Contaminated seafood
young,the very old and people whose immune systems
KEY TERMS are already weakened.
Complications of Salmonellafood poisoning include
Diuretic—Medication that increases the urine out- arthritis-like symptoms that occur three to four weeks after
put of the body. infection. Although deaths from Salmonellaare rare,they
Electrolytes—Salts and minerals that produce do occur. Most deaths caused by Salmonellafood poison-
electrically charged particles (ions) in body fluids. ing have occurred in elderly people in nursing homes.
Common human electrolytes are sodium chloride, Adults usually recover without medical interven-
potassium, calcium, and sodium bicarbonate. tion, but many children need to be hospitalized as the
Electrolytes control the fluid balance of the body result of E. coli food poisoning. E. coli toxins may be
and are important in muscle contraction, energy absorbed into the blood stream where they destroy red
generation, and almost all major biochemical blood cells and platelets. Platelets are important in blood
reactions in the body. clotting. About 5% of victims develop hemolytic-uremic
Lactobacillus acidophilus—This bacteria is found syndrome which results in sudden kidney failure and
in yogurt and changes the balance of the bacteria makes dialysis necessary. (Dialysis is a medical proce-
in the intestine in a beneficial way. dure used to filter the body’s waste product when the
kidneys have failed).
Platelets—Blood cells that help the blood to clot.
Botulism is the deadliest of the bacterial food-borne
illnesses. With prompt medical care,the death rate is less
than 10%.
azole (Septra,Bactrim),ampicillin (Amcill,Polycill) or
ciprofloxacin (Ciloxan,Cipro) are most frequently used. Prevention
Botulism is treated in a different way from other
Food poisoning is almost entirely preventable by
bacterial food poisonings. Botulism antitoxin is given to
practicing good sanitation and good food handling tech-
adults,but not infants,if it can be administered within 72
niques. These include:
hours after symptoms are first observed. If given later,it
•keep hot foods hot and cold foods cold
provides no benefit.
•cook meat to the recommended internal temperature,
Both infants and adults require hospitalization,often
use a meat thermometer to check and cook eggs until
in the intensive care unit. If the ability to breathe is
they are no longer runny
impaired,patients are put on a mechanical ventilator to
assist their breathing and are fed intravenously until the •refrigerate leftovers promptly,do not let food stand at
paralysis passes. room temperature
•avoid contaminating surfaces and other foods with the
Alternative treatment juices of uncooked meats
Alternative practitioners offer the same advice as tradi- •wash fruits and vegetables before using
tional practitioners concerning diet modification. In addi- •purchase pasteurized dairy products and fruit juices
tion they recommend taking charcoal tablets,Lactobacillus
•throw away bulging or leaking cans or any food that
acidophilus, Lactobacillus bulgaricus, and citrus seed
smells spoiled
extract. An electrolyte replacement fluid can be made at
•wash hands well before and during food preparation
home by adding one teaspoon of salt and four teaspoons of
and after using the bathroom
sugar to one quart of water. For food poisoning other than
botulism, two homeopathic remedies, either Arsenicum •sanitize food preparation surfaces regularly
albumor Nux vomica,are strongly recommended.
Resources
Prognosis
PERIODICALS
Most cases of food poisoning (except botulism) U. S. Food and Drug Administration. “The Unwelcome Dinner
clear up on their own within one week without medical Guest:Preventing Food-Borne Illness.”In FDA Consumer
(December 1997).
assistance. The ill person may continue feel tired for a
few days after active symptoms stop. So long as the ill ORGANIZATION
person does not become dehydrated,there are few com- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. <http://www.cdc.
plications. Deaths are rare and usually occur in the very gov>.
1356 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gninosiop
dooF
OTHER Many people with diabetes or circulatory disorders
U. S. Food and Drug Administration. Center for Food Safety have problems with cold feet. These problems can be
and Applied Nutrition. Bad Bug Book.<http://vm.cfsan. reduced by avoiding smoking tobacco (smoking con-
fda.gov>. stricts the blood vessels),wearing warm socks,not cross-
ing the legs while sitting or not sitting in one position too
Suzanne M. Lutwick,MPH long,or avoiding constricting stockings.
People with circulatory problems should not use heat-
ing pads or hot water bottles on their feet,as even moder-
ate heat can damage the skin if circulation is impaired.
Foot care
Preparation
Definition No special preparation other than an understanding
of the nature of foot problems is necessary to begin rou-
Foot care involves all aspects of preventative and
tine foot care.
corrective care of the foot and ankle. Doctors specializ-
ing in foot care are called podiatrists.
Aftercare
Purpose Foot care is preventative and should be ongoing
throughout a person’s life.
During an average lifetime,each person walks about
115,000 miles and three-quarters of people have foot
Risks
problems at some point in their lives.
There are no risks associated with foot care. The risks
Foot problems can arise from wearing ill-fitting
are in ignoring the feet and allowing problems to develop.
shoes,from general wear and tear,as a result of injury,or
as a complication of disease. People with diabetes melli-
Normal results
tus or circulatory diseases are 20 times more likely to
have foot problems than the general public. With regular care,foot disorders such as infections,
skin ulcers,and gangrene can be prevented.
Podiatrists are doctors who specialize in treating the
foot and ankle. Other doctors who have experience with
foot problems are family physicians,orthopedists,sports Resources
medicine specialists,and those who care for diabetics.
BOOKS
Problems with the feet include foot pain,joint inflamma-
“Foot Problems.”In The Complete Guide to Symptoms,Illness
tion, plantar warts, fungal infections (like athlete’s and Surgery.3rd ed. Ed. H. Winter Griffith,et al. New
foot),nerve disorders,torn ligaments,broken bones,bac- York:Berkeley Publishing,1995.
terial infections,and tissue injuries (like frostbite).
ORGANIZATIONS
American Diabetes Association. 1701 North Beauregard Street,
Precautions Alexandria,VA 22311. (800) 342-2383. <http://www.dia-
People with diabetes or circulatory disorders should betes.org>.
American Podiatry Association. 20 Chevy Chase Circle,NW,
be alert to even small foot problems. In these people,a
Washington,D.C. 20015.
break in the skin can lead to infection, gangrene, and
amputation. Tish Davidson
Description Foreign bodies see Foreign objects
Daily foot care for people likely to develop foot
problems includes washing the feet in tepid water with
mild soap and oiling the feet with vegetable oil or a lano-
lin-based lotion. Toenails should be cut straight across
Foreign objects
above the level of the skin after soaking the feet in tepid
water. Corns and callusesshould not be cut. If they need
Definition
removal, it should be done under the care of a doctor.
Athletes foot and plantar warts should also be treated by “Foreign”means “originating elsewhere”or simply
a doctor if they develop in high risk patients. “outside the body.” Foreign bodies typically become
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1357
Foreign
objects
mation and scarring. They can bring infection with them
or acquire it and protect it from the body’s immune
defenses. They can obstruct passageways either by their
size or by the scarring they cause. Some can be toxic.
Causes and symptoms
Eyes
Dust,dirt,sand,or other airborne material can lodge
in the eyes,causing minor irritation and redness. More
serious damage can be caused by hard or sharp objects
that penetrate the surface and become embedded in the
cornea or conjunctiva (the mucous membranes around
the inner surface of the eyelids). Swelling, redness,
bleeding from the surface blood vessels, sensitivity to
light,and sudden vision problems are all symptoms of
foreign matter in the eyes.
Ears and nose
Children will sometimes put things into their noses,
ears,and other openings. Beans,popcorn kernels,raisins,
and beads are just a few of the many items that have been
found in these bodily cavities. On occasion,insects may
also fly into the ears and nose. Pain,hearing loss,and a
sense of something stuck in the ear are symptoms of for-
eign bodies in the ears. A smelly,bloody discharge from
one nostril is a symptom of foreign bodies in the nose.
Airways and stomach
At a certain age children will eat anything. A very
partial list of items recovered from young stomachs
includes the following:Coins,chicken bones,fish bones,
beads,rocks,plastic toys,pins,keys,round stones,mar-
lodged in the eyes, ears, nose, airways, and rectum of
bles,nails,rings,batteries,ball bearings,screws,staples,
human beings.
washers,a heart pendant,a clothespin spring,and a toy
soldier. Some of these items will pass right on through
Description and come out the other end. The progress of metal objects
has been successfully followed with a metal detector.
Both children and adults experience problems
Others,like sharp bones,can get stuck and cause trouble.
caused by foreign objects getting stuck in their bodies.
Batteries are corrosive and must be removed immediately.
Young children,in particular,are naturally curious and
may intentionally put shiny objects, such as coins or Children eat things and stick things into their bodily
button batteries, into their mouths. They also like to openings of their own volition. But they inhale them
stick things in their ears and up their noses. Adults may unwittingly. The most commonly inhaled item is probably
accidentally swallow a non-food object or inhale a for- a peanut. A crayon and a cockroach have been found in a
eign body that gets stuck in the throat. Even if an object child’s windpipes. These items always cause symptoms
like a toothpick successfully passes through the esopha- (difficulty swallowing and spitting up saliva,for instance)
gus and into the stomach,it can get stuck inside the rec- and may elude detection for some time while the child is
tum. Airborne particles can lodge in the eyes of people being treated for asthmaor recurring pneumonia.
at any age.
Adults are not exempt from unorthodox inedibles.
Foreign bodies can be in hollow organs (like swal- Dental devices are commonly swallowed. Adults with
lowed batteries) or in tissues (like bullets). They can be mental illness or subversive motives may swallow inap-
inert or irritating. If they irritate they will cause inflam- propriate objects,such as toothbrushes.
1358 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stcejbo
ngieroF
X ray of swallowed spoon and blade in the intestine.(Photo
Researchers.Reproduced by permission.)
Rectum
KEY TERMS
Sometimes a foreign object will successfully pass
throught the throat and stomach only to get stuck at the
Bronchoscope—An illuminated instrument that is
juncture between the rectum and the anal canal. Items
inserted into the airway to inspect and retrieve
may also be self-introduced to enhance sexual stimula-
objects from the bronchial tubes.
tion and then get stuck. Sudden sharp pain during elimi-
nation may signify that an object is lodged in the rectum. Conjunctiva—Mucous membranes around the
Other symptoms vary depending upon the size of the inner surface of the eyelid.
object, its location, how long it has been in place, and
Cornea—The rounded, transparent portion of the
whether or not infection has set in.
eye that covers the pupil and iris and lets light into
the interior
Diagnosis Endoscopy—The surgical use of long, thin instru-
ments that have both viewing and operating capa-
The symptoms are as diverse as the objects and their
bilities.
locations. The most common manifestation of a foreign
object anywhere in the body is infection. Even if the Heimlich maneuver—An emergency procedure
object started out sterile,germs still seem to find it and for removing a foreign object lodged in the airway
are able to hide from the body’s defenses there. Blockage that is preventing the person from breathing. To
of passageways—breathing,digestive or excretory—is perform the Heimlich maneuver on a conscious
another result. Pain is common. adult, the rescuer stands behind the victim and
encircles his waist. The rescuer makes a fist with
one hand and places the other hand on top, posi-
Treatment
tioned below the rib cage and above the waist.
Eyes The rescuer then applies pressure by a series of
upward and inward thrusts to force the foreign
Small particles like sand may be removable without
object back up the victim’s trachea.
medical help,but if the object is not visible or cannot be
retrieved, prompt emergency treatment is necessary.
Trauma to the eyes can lead to loss of vision and should
never be ignored. Before attempting any treatment,the
out by blowing into the mouth while holding the other
person should move to a well-lighted area where the
nostril closed. Skilled practitioners have removed peas
object can be more easily spotted. Hands should be
from the ears by tiny improvised corkscrews; marbles by
washed and only clean, preferably sterile, materials
q-tips with super glue. Tweezers often work well, too.
should make contact with the eyes. If the particle is
Insects can be floated out of the ear by pouring warm
small, it can be dislodged by blinking or pulling the
(not hot) mineral oil, olive oil, or baby oil into the ear
upper lid over the lower lid and flushing out the speck. A
canal. Items that are lodged deep in the ear canal are
clean cloth can also be used to pick out the offending
more difficult to remove because of the possibility of
particle. Afterwards,the eye should be rinsed with clean,
damaging the ear drum. These require emergency treat-
lukewarm water or an opthalmic wash.
ment from a qualified physician.
If the foreign object cannot be removed at home,the
eye should be lightly covered with sterile gauze to dis- Airways and stomach
courage rubbing. A physician will use a strong light and
Mechanical obstruction of the airways,which com-
possibly special eyedrops to locate the object. Surgical
monly occurs when food gets lodged in the throat,can be
tweezers can effectively remove many objects. An
treated by applying the Heimlich maneuver. If the object
antibiotic sterile ointment and a patch may be pre-
is lodged lower in the airway,a bronchoscope (a special
scribed. If the foreign body has penetrated the deeper
instrument to view the airway and remove obstructions)
layers of the eye,an opthalmic surgeon will be consulted
can be inserted. On other occasions,as when the object is
for emergency treatment.
blocking the entrance to the stomach,a fiberoptic endo-
scope (an illuminated instrument that views the interior of
Ears and nose
a body cavity) may be used. The physician typically
A number of ingenious extraction methods have administers a sedative and anesthetizes the throat. The
been devised for removing foreign objects from the nose foreign object will then either be pulled out or pushed into
and ears. A bead in a nostril,for example,can be popped the stomach,depending on whether or not the physician
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1359
Foreign
objects
thinks it will pass through the digestive tract on its own. Reilly,J. S.,et al. “Size/Shape Analysis of Aerodigestive For-
Objects in the digestive tract that are neither irritating, eign Bodies in Children:A Multi-institutional Study.”
sharp nor large may be followed as they continue on American Journal of Otolaryngology16,no. 3 (May/June
through. Sterile objects that are causing no symptoms 1995):190-3.
Tidey,B.,et al. “The Use of a Metal Detector to Locate Ingest-
may be left in place. Surgical removal of the offending
ed Metallic Foreign Bodies in Children.”Journal of Acci-
object is necessary if it is causing symptoms.
dent & Emergency Medicine13,no. 5 (Sept. 1996):341-2.
Velitchkov,N. G.,et al. “Ingested Foreign Bodies of the Gas-
Rectum
trointestinal Tract:Retrospective Analysis of 542 Cases.”
A rectal retractor can remove objects that a physi- World Journal of Surgery20,no. 8 (Oct. 1996):1001-5.
cian can feel during physical examination. Surgery may
be required for objects deeply lodged within the recturm. J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
Fourn see Flesh-eating disease
Prevention
Using common sense and following safety precau- 47, XXY syndrome see Klinefelter syndrome
tions are the best ways to prevent foreign objects from
entering the body. For instance,parents and grandparents
should toddler-proof their homes,storing batteries in a
locked cabinet and properly disposing of used batteries,
so they are not in a location where curious preschoolers
Fracture repair
can fish them out of a wastebasket. To minimize the
chance of youngsters inhaling food,parents should not Definition
allow children to eat while walking or playing. Adults
Fracture repair is the process of rejoining and
should chew food thoroughly and not talk while chew-
realigning the ends of broken bones. This procedure is
ing. Many eye injuries can be prevented by wearing safe-
usually performed by an orthopedist,general surgeon,or
ty glasses while using tools
family doctor. In cases of an emergency,first aid mea-
sures should be evoked for temporary realignment and
Resources
immobilizationuntil proper medical help is available.
PERIODICALS
Cohen,J. S.,and J. M. Sackier. “Management of colorectal for-
Purpose
eign bodies.”Journal of the Royal College of Surgeons of
Edinburgh41. no. 5 (Oct. 1996):312-5. Fracture repair is required when there is a need for
Darrow,D. H.,and L. D. Holinger. “Aerodigestive Tract For- restoration of the normal position and function of the bro-
eign Bodies in the Older Child and Adolescent.”Annals of
ken bone. Throughout the stages of fracture healing,the
Otology,Rhinology & Laryngology105,no. 4 (Apr.
bones must be held firmly in the correct position. In the
1996):267-71.
event the fracture is not properly repaired,malalignment
Gilchrist,B. F.,et al. “Pearls and Perils in the Management of
of the bone may occur,resulting in possible physical dys-
Prolonged,Peculiar,Penetrating Esophageal Foreign Bod-
function of the bone or joint of that region of the body.
ies in Children.”Journal of Pediatric Surgery32,no. 10
(Oct. 1997):1429-31.
Kadish,H. A.,and H. M. Corneli “Removal of Nasal Foreign Precautions
Bodies in the Pediatric Population.”American Journal of
Emergency Medicine15,no. 1 (Jan. 1997):54-6. Precautions for fracture repair are anything found to
Kouraklis,G. et al. “Management of Foreign Bodies of the Rec- be significant with patients’medical diagnosis and histo-
tum:Report of 21 Cases.”Journal of the Royal College of ry. This would include an individual’s tolerance to anes-
Surgeons of Edinburgh42,no. 4 (Aug. 1997):246-7. thesia and the presence of bleeding disorders that may be
Manca,D. “Up Your Nose. Quick and Somewhat Dirty Method
present to complicate surgery.
of Removing Foreign Bodies from Children’s Noses.”
Canadian Family Physician43 (Feb. 1997):223.
Marlow,T. J.,et al. “Endobronchial Cockroach:An Unusual Description
Foreign Body Aspiration.”Journal of Emergency Medi-
Fracture repair is applied by means of traction,
cine15,no. 4 (July/Aug. 1997):487-9.
surgery,and/or by immobilization of the bones. The bone
O’Sullivan,S. T. et al. “Deliberate Ingestion of Foreign Bodies
fragments are aligned as close as possible to the normal
by Institutionalised Psychiatric Hospital Patients and
Prison Inmates.”Irish Journal of Medical Science165,no. position without injuring the skin. Metal wires or screws
4 (Oct./Dec. 1996):294-6. may be needed to align smaller bone fragments. Once the
1360 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
riaper
erutcarF
broken ends of the bone are set, the affected area is
immobilized for several weeks and kept rigid with a
sling,plaster cast,brace or splint. With the use of trac-
tion, muscle pull on the fracture site is overcome by
weights attached to a series of ropes running over pul-
leys. Strategically implanted electrical stimulation
devices have proven beneficial in healing a fracture site,
especially when the fracture is healing poorly and repair
by other means is difficult.
Preparation
Emergency splinting may be required to immobilize
the body part or parts involved. When fracture repair is
necessary,the procedure is often performed in a hospital
but can also be successfully done in an outpatient surgi-
cal facility,doctor’s office or emergency room. Before
any surgery for fracture repair,blood and urine studies Possible complications following fracture repair
may be taken from the patient. X rays may follow this if include excessive bleeding,improper fit of joined bone
not previously acquired. It has been noted however,that ends,pressure on nearby nerves,delayed healing,and a
not all fracturesare immediately apparent on an initial permanent incomplete healing of the fracture. If there is
x-ray examination. In this case,where a fracture is defi- a poor blood supply to the fractured site with one of the
nitely suspected the extent of the fracture can be properly portions of broken bone not properly supplied by the
diagnosed by repeating the x rays 10–14 days later. blood,the bony portion will die and healing of the frac-
Depending upon the situation,local or general anesthesia ture will not take place. This is called aseptic necrosis.
may be used for fracture repair. Poor immobilization of the fracture from improper cast-
ing which permits motion between the bone parts may
prevent healing and repair of the bone with possible
Aftercare
deformity. Infection can interfere with bone repair. This
After surgery,x rays may be again taken through the risk is greater in the case of a compound fracture (a bone
cast or splint to evaluate if rejoined pieces remain in good fracture causing an open wound) where ideal conditions
position for healing. This is usually performed either before are present for severe streptococcal and staphylococcal
the application of the splint or at least before the patient is infections. Occasionally,fractured bones in the elderly
awakened from the general anesthesia. The patient needs to may possibly never heal properly. The risk is increased
be cautious not to place excess pressure on any part of the when nutrition is poor.
cast until it is completely dry. The patient also should avoid
excess pressure on the operative site until complete healing
Normal results
has taken place and the injury has been re-examined by the
physician. If the cast becomes exposed to moisture it may Once the procedure for fracture repair is completed,
soften and require repair. The patient should also be the body begins to produce new tissue to bridge the bro-
instructed to keep the injured region propped up whenever ken pieces. At first,this tissue (called a callus) is soft and
possible to reduce the possibility of swelling. easily injured. Later, the body deposits bone minerals
until the callus becomes a solid piece of bone. The frac-
ture site is thus strengthened further with extra bone. It
Risks
usually takes about six weeks for a broken bone to heal
Surgical risks of fracture repair are greater in together. The exact time required for healing depends on
patients over 60 years of age because the bones often tak- the type of fracture and the extent of damage. Before the
ing longer to heal properly. Obesity may place extra use of x rays, fracture repair was not always accurate,
stresson the healing site,affecting healing and possibly resulting in crippling deformities. With modern x-ray
risking reinjury. Smokingmay slow the healing process technology,the physician can view the extent of the frac-
after fracture repair, as well as poor nutrition, alco- ture,check the setting following the repair,and be certain
holism, and chronic illness. Some medications may after the procedure that the bones have not moved from
affect the fracture site,causing poor union. Such medica- their intended alignment. Children’s bones usually heal
tions include anti-hypertensives and cortisone. relatively rapidly.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1361
Fracture
repair
An x-ray image of a healing fracture.(Photograph by Bates,
M.D., Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Description
KEY TERMS
A fracture usually results from traumatic injury to
bones causing the continuity of bone tissues or bony carti-
Compound fracture — A fracture in which the
lage to be disrupted or broken. Fracture classifications
broken end or ends of the bone have torn through
include simple, compound, incomplete and complete.
the skin. Compound fractures are also known as
Simple fractures (more recently called “closed”) are not
open fractures
obvious as the skin has not been ruptured and remains
Staphylococcal infection—An infection caused intact. Compound fractures (now commonly called
by any of several pathogenic species of staphylo- “open”) break the skin,exposing bone and causing addi-
coccus, commonly characterized by the formation tional soft tissue injury and possible infection. A single
of abscesses of the skin or other organs. fracture means that one fracture only has occurred and
multiple fractures refer to more than one fracture occur-
Streptococcal infection—An infection caused by
ring in the same bone. Fractures are termed complete if
a pathogenic bacteria of one of several species of
the break is completely through the bone and described as
the genus streptococcus or their toxins. Almost
incomplete or “greenstick”if the fracture occurs partly
any organ in the body may be involved.
across a bone shaft. This latter type of fracture is often the
result of bending or crushing forces applied to a bone.
Fractures are also named according to the specific
part of the bone involved and the nature of the break.
Abnormal results
Identification of a fracture line can further classify frac-
Abnormal results of fracture repair include damage tures. Types include linear,oblique,transverse,longitu-
to nearby nerves or primary blood vessels. Improper dinal,and spiral fractures. Fractures can be further subdi-
alignment causing deformity is also an abnormal out- vided by the positions of bony fragments and are
come,however,with today’s medical technology it is rel- described as comminuted, non-displaced, impacted,
atively rare. overriding,angulated,displaced,avulsed,and segmental.
Additionally,an injury may be classified as a fracture-
dislocation when a fracture involves the bony structures
Resources
of any joint with associated dislocation of the same joint.
BOOKS
Arnheim,Daniel D. Modern Principals of Athletic Training.St.
Fractures line identification
Louis:Times Mirror/Mosby College Publishing Co.,1989.
Magee,David J. Orthopedic Physical Assessment.Philidel- Linear fractures have a break that runs parallel to the
phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1992. bone’s main axis or in the direction of the bone’s shaft.
Scully,Rosemary M.,and Marylou R. Barnes. Physical Thera- For example, a linear fracture of the arm bone could
py.Philadelphia:J. B. Lippincott Co.,1989.
extend the entire length of the bone. Oblique and trans-
verse fractures differ in that an oblique fracture crosses a
PERIODICALS
bone at approximately a 45°angle to the bone’s axis. In
Gorden,Everett J. “Fractures and Dislocations:An Overview.”
Trauma37,no. 5 (Feb. 1996):5-36. contrast,a transverse fracture crosses a bone’s axis at a
90° angle. A longitudinal fracture is similar to a linear
OTHER fracture. Its fracture line extends along the shaft but is
Griffith,H. Winter. “Fracture Repair.”ThriveOnline.1998. 3 more irregular in shape and does not run parallel to the
Mar. 1998 <http://thriveonline.oxygen.com>. bone’s axis. Spiral fractures are described as crossing a
bone at an oblique angle,creating a spiral pattern. This
Jeffrey P. Larson,RPT
break usually occurs in the long bones of the body such as
the upper arm bone (humerus) or the thigh bone (femur).
Bony fragment position identification
Comminuted fractures have two or more fragments
Fractures
broken into small pieces, in addition to the upper and
lower halves of a fractured bone. Fragments of bone that
Definition
maintain their normal alignment following a fracture are
A fracture is a complete or incomplete break in a described as being non-displaced. An impacted fracture
bone resulting from the application of excessive force. is characterized as a bone fragment forced into or onto
1362 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
serutcarF
another fragment resulting from a compressive force. age of 50,more men suffer from fractures than women
Overriding is a term used to describe bony fragments due to occupational hazards. However,after the age of
that overlap and shorten the total length of a bone. 50,women are more prone to fractures than men. Specif-
Angulated fragments result in pieces of bone being at ic diseases causing an increased risk for fractures include
angles to each other. A displaced bony fragment occurs Paget’s disease,rickets,osteogenesis imperfecta,osteo-
from disruption of normal bone alignment with deformi- porosis,bone cancerand tumors,and prolonged disuse
ty of these segments separate from one another. An of a nonfunctional body part such as after a stroke.
avulsed fragment occurs when bone fragments are
Symptoms of fractures usually begin with painthat
pulled from their normal position by forceful muscle
increases with attempted movement or use of the area
contractions or resistance from ligaments. Segmental
and swelling at the involved site. The skin in the area
fragmented positioning occurs if fractures in two adja-
may be pale and an obvious deformity may be present. In
cent areas occur,leaving an isolated central segment. An
more severe cases,there may be a loss of pulse below the
example of segmental alignment is when the arm bone
fracture site,such as in the extremities,accompanied by
fractures in two separate places, with displacement of
numbness,tingling,or paralysisbelow the fracture. An
the middle section of bone.
open or compound fracture is often accompanied by
bleeding or bruising. If the lower limbs or pelvis are frac-
Causes and symptoms tured,pain and resistance to movement usually accompa-
ny the injury causing difficulty with weight bearing.
Individuals with high activity levels appear to be at
greater risk for fractures. This group includes children
Diagnosis
and athletes participating in contact sports. Because of an
increase in bone brittleness with aging,elderly persons Diagnosis begins immediately with an individual’s
are also included in this high-risk population. Up to the own observation of symptoms. A thorough medical his-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1363
Fractures
Greenstick Compound
Pott's Colles'
Fractures usually result from a traumatic injury to a bone where the continuity of bone tissues or bony cartilage is disrupted
or broken.The illustrations above feature common sites where fractures occur.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
KEY TERMS
Avulsion fracture—A fracture caused by the tearing ularly calcium. Over time, bone mass and strength
away of a fragment of bone where a strong ligament are reduced leading to increased risk of fractures.
or tendon attachment forcibly pulls the fragment
Paget’s disease—Chromic disorder of unknown
away from the bone tissue.
cause, usually affecting middle aged and elderly
Axis—A line that passes through the center of the people, characterized by enlarged and deformed
body or body part. bones. Excessive breakdown and formation of bone
Comminuted fracture—A fracture where there are tissue occurs with Paget’s disease and can cause
several breaks in a bone creating numerous frag- bone to weaken, resulting in bone pain, arthritis,
ments. deformities, and fractures.
Compartment syndrome—Compartment syndrome Reduction—The restoration of a body part to its
is a condition in which a muscle swells but is con- original position after displacement, such as the
stricted by the connective tissue around it, which reduction of a fractured bone by bringing ends or
cuts off blood supply to the muscle. fragments back into original alignment. The use of
local or general anesthesia usually accompanies a
Contrast hydrotherapy—A series of hot and cold
fracture reduction. If performed by outside manipu-
water applications. A hot compress (as hot as an
lation only, the reduction is described as closed; if
individual can tolerate) is applied for three minutes
surgery is necessary, it is described as open.
followed by an ice cold compress for 30 seconds.
These applications are repeated three times each Rickets—A condition caused by the dietary defi-
and ending with the cold compress. ciency of vitamin D, calcium, and usually phospho-
Osteogenesis imperfecta—A genetic disorder rus, seen primarily in infancy and childhood, and
involving defective development of connective tis- characterized by abnormal bone formation.
sues, characterized by brittle and fragile bones that
Traction—The process of placing a bone, limb, or
are easily fractured by the slightest trauma.
group of muscles under tension by applying weights
Osteoporosis—Literally meaning “porous bones,” and pulleys. The goal is to realign or immobilize the
this condition occurs when bones lose an excessive part or to relieve pressure on that particular area to
amount of their protein and mineral content, partic- promote healing and restore function.
tory and physical exam by a physician often reveals the a metal instrument with a stem and two prongs that
presence of a fracture. An x ray of the injured area is the vibrate when struck. If an individual has increased pain
most common test used to determine the presence of a when the tuning fork is placed on a bone, such as the
bone fracture. Any x ray series performed involves at tibia or shinbone, the likelihood of a stress fracture is
least two views of the area to confirm the presence of the high. Bone scans also are helpful in detecting stress frac-
fracture because not all fractures are apparent on a single tures. In this diagnostic procedure,a radioactive tracer is
x-ray. Some fractures are often difficult to see and may injected into the bloodstream and images are taken of
require several views at different angles to see clear frac- specific areas or the entire skeleton by CT or MRI.
ture lines. In some cases,CT,MRI or other imaging tests
are required to demonstrate fracture. Sometimes,espe- Treatment
cially with children,the initial x ray may not show any
Treatment depends on the type of fracture,its severi-
fractures but repeat x rays seven to 14 days later may
ty,the individual’s age and general health. The first prior-
show changes in the bone(s) of the affected area. If a
ity in treating any fracture is to address the entire medical
fracture is open and occurs in conjunction with soft tis-
status of the patient. Medical personnel are trained not
sue injury,further laboratory studies are often conducted
allow a painful, deformed limb to distract them from
to determine if blood loss has occurred.
potentially life-threatening injury elsewhere or shock. If
In the event of exercise-related stress fractures an open fracture is accompanied by serious soft tissue
(micro-fractures due to excessive stress),a tuning fork injury,it may be necessary to control bleeding and the
can provide a simple,inexpensive test. The tuning fork is shock that can accompany loss of blood.
1364 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
serutcarF
First aid is the appropriate initial treatment in emer- tion involves the use of metallic devices inserted into or
gency situations. It includes proper splinting,control of through bone to hold the fracture in a set position and
blood loss,and monitoring vital signs such as breathing alignment while it heals. Devices include plates, nails,
and circulation. screws,and rods. When healing is complete,the surgeon
may or may not remove these devices. Virtually any hip
Immobilization fracture requires open reduction and internal fixation so
that the bone will be able to support the patient’s weight.
Immobilizationof a fracture site can be done inter-
nally or externally. The primary goal of immobilization
Alternative treatment
is to maintain the realignment of a bone long enough for
healing to start and progress. Immobilization by external In addition to the importance of calcium for strong
fixation uses splints, casts, or braces. This may be the bones, many alternative treatment approaches recom-
primary and only procedure for fracture treatment. mend use of mineral supplements to help build and main-
Splinting to immobilize a fracture can be done with or tain a healthy, resilient skeleton. Some physical thera-
without traction. In emergency situations if the injured pists use electro-stimulation over a fractured site to pro-
individual must be moved by someone other than a mote and expedite healing. Chinese traditional medicine
trained medical person,splinting is a useful form of frac- may be helpful by working to reconnect chi through the
ture management. It should be done without causing meridian lines along the line of a fracture. Homeopathy
additional pain and without moving the bone segments. can enhance the body’s healing process. Two particularly
In a clinical environment,plaster of Paris casts are used useful homeopathic remedies are Arnica(Arnica mon-
for immobilization. Braces are useful as they often allow tana) and Symphytum(Symphytum officinalis). If possi-
movement above and below a fracture site. Treatments ble, applying contrast hydrotherapy to an extremity
for stress fractures include rest and decreasing or stop- (e.g.,a hand or foot) of a fractured area can assist healing
ping any activity that causes or increases pain. by enhancing circulation.
Fracture reduction Prognosis
Fracture reduction is the procedure by which a frac- Fractures involving joint surfaces almost always lead
tured bone is realigned in normal position. It can be to some degree of arthritis of the joint. Fractures can nor-
either closed or open. Closed reduction refers to realign- mally be cured with proper first aid and appropriate after-
ing bones without breaking the skin. It is performed with care. If determined necessary by a physician, the frac-
manual manipulation and/or traction and is commonly tured site should be manipulated,realigned,and immobi-
done with some kind of anesthetic. Open reduction pri- lized as soon as possible. Realignment has been shown to
marily refers to surgery that is performed to realign be much more difficult after six hours. Healing time
bones or fragments. Fractures with little or no displace- varies from person to person with the elderly generally
ment may not require any form of reduction. needing more time to heal completely. A non-union frac-
ture may result when a fracture does not heal,such as in
Traction is used to help reposition a broken bone. It
the case of an elderly person or an individual with med-
works by applying pressure to restore proper alignment.
ical complications. Recovery is complete when there is no
The traction device immobilizes the area and maintains
bone motion at the fracture site,and x rays indicate com-
realignment as the bone heals. A fractured bone is immo-
plete healing. Open fractures may lead to bone infections,
bilized by applying opposing force at both ends of the
which delay the healing process. Another possible com-
injured area,using an equal amount of traction and coun-
plication is compartment syndrome,a painful condition
tertraction. Weights provide the traction pull needed or
resulting from the expansion of enclosed tissue and that
the pull is achieved by positioning the individual’s body
may occur when a body part is immobilized in a cast.
weight appropriately. Traction is a form of closed reduc-
tion and is sometimes used as an alternative to surgery.
Since it restricts movement of the affected limb or body Prevention
part,it may confine a person to bed rest for an extended
Adequate calcium intake is necessary for strong
period of time.
bones and can help decrease the risk of fractures. People
A person may need open reduction if there is an open, who do not get enough calcium in their dietscan take a
severe,or comminuted fracture. This procedure allows a calcium supplement. Exercisecan help strengthen bones
physician to examine and surgically correct associated soft by increasing bone density,thereby decreasing the risk of
tissue damage while reducing the fracture and,if neces- fractures from falls. A University of Southern California
sary,applying internal or external devices. Internal fixa- study reported that older people who exercised one or
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1365
Fractures
more hours per day had approximately half the incidence
of hip fractures as those who exercised fewer than 30 Fragile X syndrome
minutes per day or not at all.
Definition
Fractures can be prevented if safety measures are
taken seriously. These measures include using seat belts Fragile X syndrome is the most common form of
in cars and encouraging children to wear protective inherited mental retardation. Individuals with this con-
sports gear. Estrogen replacement for women past the dition have developmental delay,variable levels of men-
age of 50 has been shown to help prevent osteoporosis tal retardation,and behavioral and emotional difficulties.
and the fractures that may result from this condition. In They may also have characteristic physical traits. Gener-
one study,elderly women on estrogen replacement thera- ally,males are affected with moderate mental retardation
py demonstrated the lowest occurrence of hip fractures and females with mild mental retardation.
when compared to similar women not on estrogen
replacement therapy.
Description
Fragile X syndrome is also known as Martin-Bell syn-
Resources
drome,Marker X syndrome,and FRAXA syndrome. It is
BOOKS the most common form of inherited mental retardation.
Burr,David B. Musculoskeletal Fatigue and Stress Fracture. Fragile X syndrome is caused by a mutation in the FMR-1
Boca Raton,FL:CRC Press,2001.
gene,located on the X chromosome. The role of the gene is
Jupiter,J. Fractures and Dislocations of the Hand.St. Louis:
unclear,but it is probably important in early development.
Mosby,2001.
Moehring,H. David,and Adam Greenspan. Fractures:Diag- In order to understand fragile X syndrome it is
nosis and Treatment.New York:McGraw Hill,2000. important to understand how human genes and chromo-
Ogden,John A. Skeletal Injury in the Child.New York: somes influence this condition. Normally,each cell in the
Springer Verlag,2000. body contains 46 (23 pairs of) chromosomes. These
Schenck,Robert C.,and Ronnie P. Barnes. Athletic Training
chromosomes consist of genetic material (DNA) needed
and Sports Medicine,3rd ed.Chicago:American Acade-
for the production of proteins, which lead to growth,
my of Orthopaedic Surgery,1999.
development, and physical/intellectual characteristics.
Wiss,Donald A.,and Christopher B. Williams. Fractures.Bal-
The first 22 pairs of chromosomes are the same in males
timore:Williams & Wilkins,1998.
and females. The remaining two chromosomes are called
PERIODICALS the sex chromosomes (X and Y). The sex chromosomes
Lesho,Emil P. “Tuning Fork Test Finds Fractures.”Military determine whether a person is male or female. Males
Medicine162 (1997):802-803. have only one X chromosome,which is inherited from
the mother at conception,and they receive a Y chromo-
ORGANIZATIONS
some from the father. Females inherit two X chromo-
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. 6300 North River
Road,Rosemont,IL 60018-4262. (847) 823-7186 or (800) somes, one from each parent. Fragile X syndrome is
346-2267. Fax:(847) 823-8125. <http://orthoinfo.aaos.org/>. caused by a mutation in a gene called FMR-1. This gene
American College of Sports Medicine. 401 W. Michigan St., is located on the X chromosome. The FMR-1 gene is
Indianapolis,IN 46202. (317) 637-9200,Fax:(317) 634- thought to play an important role in the development of
7817. the brain,but the exact way that the gene acts in the body
Children’s Orthopedics of Atlanta. <http://www.childrensortho. is not fully understood.
com/fractures.htm>.
Fragile X syndrome affects males and females of all
Nemours Foundation. <http://kidshealth.org/kid/ill_injure/aches/
broken_bones.html>. ethnic groups. It is estimated that there are about one in
4,000 to one in 6,250 males affected with fragile X syn-
OTHER drome. There are approximately half as many females with
“About the Human.”<http://orthopedics.about.com/health/ortho-
fragile X syndrome as there are males. The carrier frequen-
pedics/blhipfracture.htm>.
cy in unaffected females is one in 100 to one in 600,with
Family Practice Notebook.com. <http://www.fpnotebook.com/
one study finding a carrier frequency of one in 250.
FRA.htm>.
National Library of Medicine. <http://medlineplus.adam.com/
ency/article/000001.htm>.
Causes and symptoms
University of Iowa. <http://www.vh.org/Providers/ClinRef/
FPHandbook/Chapter06/18-6.html>. For reasons not fully understood,the CGG sequence
in the FMR-1 gene can expand to contain between 54
L. Fleming Fallon,Jr.,MD,DrPH and 230 repeats. This stage of expansion is called a pre-
1366 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
X
eligarF
KEY TERMS
Amniocentesis—A procedure performed at 16-18 complex of proteins and DNA. Humans have 46
weeks of pregnancy in which a needle is inserted chromosomes arranged into 23 pairs. Changes in
through a woman’s abdomen into her uterus to either the total number of chromosomes or their
draw out a small sample of the amniotic fluid from shape and size (structure) may lead to physical or
around the baby. Either the fluid itself or cells from mental abnormalities.
the fluid can be used for a variety of tests to obtain
FMR-1 gene—A gene found on the X chromosome.
information about genetic disorders and other med-
Its exact purpose is unknown, but it is suspected
ical conditions in the fetus.
that the gene plays a role in brain development.
CGG or CGG sequence—Shorthand for the DNA
Mitral valve prolapse—A heart defect in which one
sequence: cytosine-guanine-guanine. Cytosine and
of the valves of the heart (which normally controls
guanine are two of the four molecules, otherwise
blood flow) becomes floppy. Mitral valve prolapse
called nucleic acids, that make up DNA.
may be detected as a heart murmur but there are
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS)—A procedure used
usually no symptoms.
for prenatal diagnosis at 10-12 weeks gestation.
Under ultrasound guidance a needle is inserted Premutation—A change in a gene that precedes a
either through the mother’s vagina or abdominal wall mutation; this change does not alter the function of
and a sample of cells is collected from around the the gene.
early embryo. These cells are then tested for chromo-
X chromosome—One of the two sex chromo-
some abnormalities or other genetic diseases.
somes (the other is Y) containing genetic material
Chromosome—A microscopic thread-like structure that, among other things, determine a person’s
found within each cell of the body and consists of a gender.
mutation. People who carry a premutation do not usually aspect fragile X syndrome is that mosaicism is present in
have symptoms of fragile X syndrome; although there 15–20% those affected by the condition. Mosaicism is
have been reports of individuals with a premutation and when there is the presence of cells of two different genet-
subtle intellectual or behavioral symptoms. Individuals ic materials in the same individual.
who carry a fragile X premutation are at risk to have chil-
The mutation involves a short sequence of DNA in
dren or grandchildren with the condition. Female premu-
the FMR-1 gene. This sequence is designated CGG. Nor-
tation carriers may also be at increased risk for earlier
mally,the CGG sequence is repeated between six to 54
onset of menopause; however,premutation carriers may
times. People who have repeats in this range do not have
exist through several generations of a family and no
fragile X syndrome and are not at increased risk to have
symptoms of fragile X syndrome will appear.
children with fragile X syndrome. Those affected by frag-
ile X syndrome have expanded CGG repeats (over 200) in
The size of the premutation can expand over suc-
the first exon of the FMR1 gene (the full mutation)
ceeding generations. Once the size of the premutation
exceeds 230 repeats,it becomes a full mutation and the Fragile X syndrome inherited in an X-linked domi-
FMR-1 gene is disabled. Individuals who carry the full nant manner (characters are transmitted by genes on the X
mutation may have fragile X syndrome. Since the FMR- chromosome). When a man carries a premutation on his
1 gene is located on the X chromosome,males are more X chromosome,it tends to be stable and usually will not
likely to develop symptoms than females. This is because expand if he passes it on to his daughters (he passes his Y
males have only one copy of the X chromosome. Males chromosome to his sons). Thus,all of his daughters will
who inherit the full mutation are expected to have mental be premutation carriers like he is. When a woman carries
impairment. A female’s normal X chromosome may a premutation,it is unstable and can expand as she passes
compensate for her chromosome with the fragile X gene it on to her children,therefore a man’s grandchildren are
mutation. Females who inherit the full mutation have an at greater risk of developing the syndrome. There is a
approximately 50% risk of mental impairment. The phe- 50% risk for a premutation carrier female to transmit an
nomenon of an expanding trinucleotide repeat in succes- abnormal mutation with each pregnancy. The likelihood
sive generations is called anticipation. Another unique for the premutation to expand is related to the number of
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1367
Fragile
X
syndrome
repeats present; the higher the number of repeats, the detecting the condition due to trinucleotide repeat expan-
greater the chance that the premutation will expand to a sion. Prenatal testing should only be undertaken after the
full mutation in the next generation. All mothers of a child fragile X carrier status of the parents has been confirmed
with a full mutation are carriers of an FMR-1 gene expan- and the couple has been counseled regarding the risks of
sion. Ninety-nine percent of patients with fragile X syn- recurrence. While prenatal testing is possible to do with
drome have a CGG expansion,and less than one percent CVS,the results can be difficult to interpret and addition-
have a point mutation or deletion on the FMR1 gene. al testing may be required.
Individuals with fragile X syndrome appear normal
at birth but their development is delayed. Most boys with Treatment
fragile X syndrome have mental impairment. The severi-
Presently there is no cure for fragile X syndrome.
ty of mental impairment ranges from learning disabilities
Management includes such approaches as speech thera-
to severe mental retardation. Behavioral problems
py, occupational therapy, and physical therapy. The
include attention deficit and hyperactivity at a young age.
expertise of psychologists, special education teachers,
Some may show aggressive behavior in adulthood. Short
and genetic counselors may also be beneficial. Drugs
attention span,poor eye contact,delayed and disordered
may be used to treat hyperactivity, seizures, and other
speech and language,emotional instability,and unusual
problems. Establishing a regular routine,avoiding over
hand mannerisms (hand flapping or hand biting) are also
stimulation,and using calming techniques may also help
seen frequently. Characteristic physical traits appear later
in the management of behavioral problems. Children
in childhood. These traits include a long and narrow face,
with a troubled heart valve may need to see a heart spe-
prominent jaw,large ears,and enlarged testes. In females
cialist and take medications before surgery or dental pro-
who carry a full mutation, the physical and behavioral
cedures. Children with frequent ear and sinus infections
features and mental retardation tend to be less severe.
may need to take medications or have special tubes
About 50% of females who have a full mutation are men-
placed in their ears to drain excess fluid. Mainstreaming
tally retarded. Other behavioral characteristics include
of children with fragile X syndrome into regular class-
whirling,spinning,and occasionally autism.
rooms is encouraged because they do well imitating
Children with fragile X syndrome often have fre- behavior. Peer tutoring and positive reinforcement are
quent ear and sinus infections. Nearsightedness and lazy also encouraged.
eye are also common. Many babies with fragile X syn-
drome may have trouble with sucking and some experi-
Prognosis
ence digestive disorders that cause frequent gagging and
vomiting. A small percentage of children with fragile X Early diagnosis and intensive intervention offer the
syndrome may experience seizures. Children with fragile best prognosis for individuals with fragile X syndrome.
X syndrome also tend to have loose joints which may Adults with fragile X syndrome may benefit from voca-
result in joint dislocations. Some children develop a cur- tional training and may need to live in a supervised set-
vature in the spine,flat feet,and a heart condition known ting. Life span is typically normal.
as mitral valve prolapse.
Resources
Diagnosis BOOK
Sutherland,Grant R.,and John C. Mulley. “Fragile X Syn-
Any child with signs of developmental delay of drome.”In Emery and Rimoin’s Principles and Practice
speech,language,or motor development with no known of Medical Genetics,Ed. David L. Rimoin,J. Michael
cause should be considered for fragile X testing,espe- Connor,and Reed E. Pyeritz,1745–66. New York:
cially if there is a family history of the condition. Behav- Churchill Livingstone,1997.
ioral and developmental problems may indicate fragile X
PERIODICALS
syndrome, particularly if there is a family history of de Vries,B.B.A.,et al. “The Fragile X Syndrome.”Journal of
mental retardation. Definitive identification of the fragile Medical Genetics35 (1998):579–89.
X syndrome is made by means of a genetic test to assess Kaufmann,Walter E.,and Allan L. Reiss. “Molecular and Cel-
the number of CGG sequence repeats in the FMR-1 lular Genetics of Fragile X Syndrome.”American Journal
gene. Individuals with the premutation or full mutation of Medical Genetics88 (1999):11–24.
may be identified through genetic testing. Genetic test-
ORGANIZATIONS
ing for the fragile X mutation can be done on the devel-
Arc of the United States (formerly Association for Retarded Cit-
oping baby before birth through amniocentesisor chori- izens of the US). 500 East Border St.,Suite 300,Arlington,
onic villus sampling (CVS), and is 99% effective in TX 76010. (817) 261-6003. <http://thearc.org>.
1368 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
X
eligarF
National Fragile X Foundation. PO Box 190488,San Francisco, thereby impairing iron transport. Normally,there are 10-
CA 94119-0988. (800) 688-8765 or (510) 763-6030. Fax: 21 repeats of the frataxin gene. In FA,this sequence may
(510) 763-6223. natlfx@sprintmail.com. <http://nfxf.org>. be repeated between 200-900 times. The types of symp-
National Fragile X Syndrome Support Group. 206 Sherman toms and severity of FA seems to be associated with the
Rd.,Glenview,IL 60025. (708) 724-8626.
number of repetitions. Patients with more copies have
OTHER more severe symptomatology. Researchers are still
“Fragile X Site Mental Retardation 1;FMR1.”Online wrestling with how frataxin and the repeats on chromo-
Mendelian Inheritance in Man<http://www3.ncbi.nlm. some 9 are involved in causing FA. One theory suggests
nih.gov/Omim/>. (March 6,2001). that FA develops in part because defects in iron transport
Tarleton,Jack,and Robert A. Saul. “Fragile X Syndrome.” prevent efficient use of cellular energy supplies.
GeneClinics<http://www.geneclinics.org>. (6 March.
The nerve cells most affected by FA are those in the
2001).
spinal cord involved in relaying information between
muscles and the brain. Tight control of movement
Nada Quercia,MS,CCGC
requires complex feedback between the muscles promot-
ing a movement,those restraining it,and the brain. With-
Frambesia see Yaws
out this control, movements become uncoordinated,
Francisella tularensis infection see Tularemia jerky,and inappropriate to the desired action.
Fresh cell therapy see Cell therapy
Symptoms
Symptoms of FA usually first appear between the
ages of 8 and 15,although onset as early as 18 months or
as late as age 25 is possible. The first symptom is usually
gait incoordination. A child with FA may graze doorways
Friedreich’s ataxia when passing through, for instance, or trip over low
obstacles. Unsteadiness when standing still and deterio-
Definition
ration of position sense is common. Foot deformities and
Friedreich’s ataxia (FA) is an inherited,progressive walking up off the heels often results from uneven mus-
nervous system disorder causing loss of balance and cle weakness in the legs. Muscle spasms and cramps
coordination. may occur,especially at night.
Ataxia in the arms follows, usually within several
Description years,leading to decreased hand-eye coordination. Arm
weakness does not usually occur until much later. Speech
Ataxia is a condition marked by impaired coordina- and swallowing difficulties are common. Diabetes melli-
tion. Friedreich’s ataxia is the most common inherited tusmay also occur. Nystagmus,or eye tremor,is com-
ataxia,affecting between 3,000–5,000 people in the Unit- mon,along with some loss of visual acuity. Hearing loss
ed States. FA is an autosomal recessive disease, which may also occur. A side-to-side curvature of the spine (sco-
means that two defective gene copies must be inherited to liosis) occurs in many cases,and may become severe.
develop symptoms,one from each parent. A person with
Heartbeat abnormalities occur in about two thirds of
only one defective gene copy will not show signs of FA,
FA patients,leading to shortness of breathafter exer-
but may pass along the gene to offspring. Couples with
tion, swelling in the lower limbs, and frequent com-
one child affected by FA have a 25% chance in each
plaints of cold feet.
pregnancyof conceiving another affected child.
Diagnosis
Causes and symptoms
Diagnosis of FA involves a careful medical history
Causes and thorough neurological exam. Lab tests include elec-
tromyography,an electrical test of muscle,and a nerve
The gene for FA codes for a protein called frataxin.
conduction velocity test. An electrocardiogram may be
Normal frataxin is found in the cellular energy structures
performed to diagnose heart arrhythmia.
known as mitochondria, where it is thought to be
involved in regulating the transport of iron. In FA, the Direct DNA testing is available,allowing FA to be
frataxin gene on chromosome 9 is expanded with non- more easily distinguished from other types of ataxia. The
sense information known as a “triple repeat.”This extra same test may be used to determine the presence of the
DNA interferes with normal production of frataxin, genetic defect in unaffected individuals,such as siblings.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1369
Friedreich’s
ataxia
KEY TERMS Frostbite and frostnip
Definition
Ataxia—A condition marked by impaired coordi-
nation. Frostbite is the term for damage to the skin and other
tissues caused by freezing. Frostnip is a mild form of
Scoliosis—An abnormal, side-to-side curvature of
cold injury.
the spine.
Description
Treatment In North America, frostbite is largely confined to
Alaska, Canada, and the northern states. Recent years
There is no cure for FA, nor any treatment that can
have witnessed a substantial decline in the number of
slow its progress. Amantadine may provide some limited
cases,probably for several reasons,including better win-
improvement in ataxic symptoms,but is not recommended
ter clothing and footwear and greater public understand-
in patients with cardiac abnormalities. Physical and occupa-
ing of how to avoid cold-weather dangers. At the same
tional therapy are used to maintain range of motion in weak-
time,the nature of the at-risk population has changed as
ened muscles, and to design adaptive techniques and
rising numbers of homeless people have made frostbite
devices to compensate for loss of coordination and strength.
an urban as well as a rural public health concern. The
Some patients find that using weights on the arms can help
growing popularity of outdoor winter activities has also
dampen the worst of the uncoordinated arm movements.
expanded the at-risk population.
Heart arrhythmias and diabetes are treated with
drugs specific to those conditions.
Causes and symptoms
Prognosis Frostbite
The rate of progression of FA is highly variable. Most Skin exposed to temperatures a little below the
patients lose the ability to walk within 15 years of symp- freezing mark can take hours to freeze,but very cold skin
tom onset,and 95% require a wheelchair for mobility by can freeze in minutes or seconds. Air temperature,wind
age 45. Reduction in lifespan from FA complications is speed,and moisture all affect how cold the skin becomes.
also quite variable. Average age at deathis in the mid-thir- A strong wind can lower skin temperature considerably
ties,but may be as late as the mid-sixties. As of mid-1998, by dispersing the thin protective layer of warm air that
the particular length of the triple repeat has not been corre- surrounds our bodies. Wet clothing readily draws heat
lated strongly enough with disease progression to allow away from the skin because water is a potent conductor
prediction of the course of the disease on this basis. of heat. The evaporation of moisture on the skin also pro-
duces cooling. For these reasons,wet skin or clothing on
Prevention a windy day can lead to frostbite even if the air tempera-
ture is above the freezing mark.
There is no way to prevent development of FA in a
person carrying two defective gene copies. The extent of permanent injury, however,is deter-
mined not by how cold the skin and the underlying tis-
Resources sues become but by how long they remain frozen. Conse-
quently,homeless people and others whose self-preser-
BOOKS
vation instincts may be clouded by alcohol or psychiatric
Feldman,Eva L. “Hereditary Cerebellar Ataxias and Related
illness face a greater risk of frostbite-related amputation
Disorders.”In Cecil Textbook of Medicine,ed. Russel L.
because they are more likely to stay out in the cold when
Cecil et al. Philadelphia:W.B. Saunders Company,2000.
prudence dictates seeking shelter or medical attention.
“Spinocerebellar Degeneration (Friedreich’s Ataxia).”In Har-
Alcohol also affects blood circulation in the extremities
rison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,edited by Kurt J.
Isselbacher et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,2001. in a way that can increase the severity of injury (as does
smoking). A review of 125 Saskatchewan frostbite cases
ORGANIZATIONS found a tie to alcohol in 46% and to psychiatric illness in
Muscular Dystrophy Association. 3300 East Sunrise Drive,
17%. Other risk factors identified by researchers include
Tucson,AZ 85718. (520) 529-2000 or (800) 572-1717.
inadequate clothing, previous cold injury, fatigue,
<http://www.mdausa.org>.
wound infection, atherosclerosis (an arterial disease),
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt and diabetes. Driving in poor weather can also be dan-
1370 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
pintsorf
dna
etibtsorF
gerous: vehicular failure was a predisposing factor in
15% of the Saskatchewan cases.
Three nearly simultaneous physiological processes
underlie frostbite injury:tissue freezing,tissue hypoxia,and
the release of inflammatory mediators. Tissue freezing
causes ice crystal formation and other changes that damage
and eventually kill cells. Much of this harm occurs because
the ice produces pressure changes that cause water (crucial
for cell survival) to flow out of the cells. Tissue hypoxia
(oxygen deficiency) occurs when the blood vessels in the
hands, feet, and other extremities narrow in response to
cold. Among its many tasks,blood transfers body heat to the
skin,which then dissipates the heat into the environment.
Blood vessel narrowing is the body’s way of protecting vital
internal organs at the expense of the extremities by reducing
heat flow away from the core. However,blood also carries
life-sustaining oxygen to the skin and other tissues,and nar-
the crystals dissolve as soon as the skin is warmed. Frostnip
rowed vessels result in oxygen starvation. Narrowing also
affects areas such as the earlobes,cheeks,nose,fingers,and
causes acidosis (an increase in tissue acidity) and increases
toes. The skin turns pale and one experiences numbness or
blood viscosity (thickness). Ultimately,blood stops flowing
tingling in the affected part until warming begins.
through the capillaries (the tiny blood vessels that connect
the arteries and veins) and blood clots form in the arterioles
and venules (the smallest arteries and veins). Damage also Diagnosis
occurs to the endothelial cells that line the blood vessels.
Frostbite diagnosis relies on a physical examina-
Hypoxia,blood clots,and endothelial damage lead,in turn,
tionand may also include conventional radiography (x
to the release of inflammatory mediators (substances that
rays),angiography(x-ray examination of the blood ves-
act as links in the inflammatory process),which promote
sels using an injected dye to provide contrast),thermog-
further endothelial damage,hypoxia,and cell destruction.
raphy (use of a heat-sensitive device for measuring blood
Frostbite is classified by degree of injury (first,sec- flow),and other techniques for predicting the course of
ond, third, or fourth), or simply divided into two types, injury and identifying tissue that requires surgical
superficial (corresponding to first- or second-degree removal. During the initial treatment period,however,a
injury) and deep (corresponding to third- or fourth-degree physician cannot judge how a case will progress. Diag-
injury). Most frostbite injuries affect the feet or hands. The nostic tests only become useful three to five days after
remaining 10% of cases typically involve the ears,nose, rewarming,once the blood vessels have stabilized.
cheeks,or penis. Once frostbite sets in,the affected part
begins to feel cold and,usually,numb; this is followed by Treatment
a feeling of clumsiness. The skin turns white or yellowish.
Frostbite
Many patients experience severe painin the affected part
during rewarming treatment and an intense throbbing pain Emergency medical help should always be sum-
that arises two or three days later and can last days or moned whenever frostbite is suspected. While waiting for
weeks. As the skin begins to thaw during treatment, help to arrive,one should,if possible,remove wet or tight
edema (excess tissue fluid) often accumulates, causing clothing and put on dry,loose clothing or wraps. A splint
swelling. In second- and higher-degree frostbite,blisters and padding are used to protect the injured area. Rubbing
appear. Third-degree cases produce deep,blood-filled blis- the area with snow or anything else is dangerous. The key
ters and, during the second week, a hard black eschar to prehospital treatment is to avoid partial thawing and
(scab). Fourth-degree frostbite penetrates below the skin to refreezing,which releases more inflammatory mediators
the muscles,tendons,nerves,and bones. In severe cases of and makes the injury substantially worse. For this reason,
frostbite the dead tissue can mummify and drop off. Infec- the affected part must be kept away from heat sources such
tion is also a possibility. as campfires and car heaters. Experts advise rewarming in
the field only when emergency help will take more than
Frostnip two hours to arrive and refreezing can be prevented.
Like frostbite,frostnip is associated with ice crystal Because the outcome of a frostbite injury cannot be
formation in the tissues,but no tissue destruction occurs and predicted at first,all hospital treatment follows the same
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1371
Frostbite
and
frostnip
A human hand with frostbite.(Photo Researchers, Inc.Repro-
duced by permission.)
route. Treatment begins by rewarming the affected part effective than older methods in preventing tissue loss and
for 15–30 minutes in water at a temperature of amputation. A study of 56 first-,second-,and third-degree
104–108°F (40–42.2°C). This rapid rewarming halts ice frostbite patients treated with rapid rewarming in
crystal formation and dilates narrowed blood vessels. 1982–85 found that 68% recovered without tissue loss,
Aloe vera (which acts against inflammatory mediators) is 25% experienced some tissue loss,and 7% needed ampu-
applied to the affected part,which is then splinted,ele- tation. In a comparison group of 98 patients, treatment
vated, and wrapped in a dressing. Depending on the using older methods resulted in a tissue loss rate of nearly
extent of injury, blisters may be debrided (cleaned by 35% and an amputation rate of nearly 33%. Although the
removing foreign material) or simply covered with aloe comparison group included a higher proportion of sec-
vera. A tetanusshot and,possibly,penicillin,are used to ond- and third-degree cases,the difference in treatment
prevent infection,and the patient is given ibuprofen to results was determined to be statistically significant.
combat inflammation. Narcotics are needed in most
The extreme throbbing pain that many frostbite suf-
cases to reduce the excruciating pain that occurs as sen-
ferers endure for days or weeks after rewarming is not
sation returns during rewarming. Except when injury is
the only prolonged symptom of frostbite. During the first
minimal,treatment generally requires a hospital stay of
weeks or months, people often experience tingling, a
several days,during which hydrotherapyand physical
burning sensation,or a sensation resembling shocks from
therapy are used to restore the affected part to health.
an electric current. Other possible consequences of frost-
Experts recommend a cautious approach to tissue
bite include skin—color changes, nail deformation or
removal,and advise that 22–45 days must pass before a
loss,joint stiffness and pain,hyperhidrosis(excessive
decision on amputation can safely be made.
sweating),and heightened sensitivity to cold. For every-
one,a degree of sensory loss lasting at least four years—
Frostnip
and sometimes a lifetime—is inevitable.
Frostnipped fingers are helped by blowing warm air
on them or holding them under one’s armpits. Other Prevention
frostnipped areas can be covered with warm hands. The
With the appropriate knowledge and precautions,
injured areas should never be rubbed.
frostbite can be prevented even in the coldest and most
challenging environments. Appropriate clothing and
Alternative treatment
footwear are essential. To prevent heat loss and keep the
Alternative practitioners suggest several kinds of blood circulating properly, clothing should be worn
treatment to speed recovery from frostbite after leaving the loosely and in layers. Covering the hands,feet,and head
hospital. Bathing the affected part in warm water or using is also crucial for preventing heat loss. Outer garments
contrast hydrotherapy can help enhance circulation. Con- need to be wind and water resistant,and wet clothing and
trast hydrotherapy involves a series of hot and cold water footwear must be replaced as quickly as possible. Alco-
applications. A hot compress (as hot as the patient can hol and drugs should be avoided because of their harmful
stand) is applied to the affected area for three minutes fol- effects on judgment and reasoning. Experts also warn
lowed by an ice cold compress for 30 seconds. These against alcohol use and smoking in the cold because of
applications are repeated three times each,ending with the the circulatory changes they produce. Paying close atten-
cold compress. Nutritional therapy to promote tissue tion to the weather report before venturing outdoors and
growth in damaged areas may also be helpful. Homeo- avoiding unnecessary risks such as driving in isolated
pathic and botanical therapies may also assist recovery areas during a blizzard are also important.
from frostbite. Homeopathic Hypericum(Hypericum per-
foratum) is recommended when nerve ending are affected Resources
(especially in the fingers and toes) and Arnica (Arnica
BOOKS
montana) is prescribed for shock. Cayenne pepper (Cap-
Burton Goldberg Group. Alternative Medicine:The Definitive
sicum frutescens) can enhance circulation and relieve pain.
Guide.Puyallup,WA:Future Medicine Publishing,Inc.,
Drinking hot ginger (Zingiber officinale) tea also aids cir-
1993.
culation. Other possible approaches include acupuncture Danzl,Daniel F. “Disturbances Due to Cold.”In Conn’s Cur-
to avoid permanent nerve damage and oxygen therapy. rent Therapy,1996,ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia:W.
B. Saunders Co.,1996.
McCauley,Robert L.,et al. “Frostbite and Other Cold-Induced
Prognosis
Injuries.”In Wilderness Medicine:Management of Wilder-
The rapid rewarming approach to frostbite treatment, ness and Environmental Emergencies,ed. Paul S. Auer-
pioneered in the 1980s, has proved to be much more bach. St. Louis:Mosby,1995.
1372 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
pintsorf
dna
etibtsorF
PERIODICALS
Gill Jr.,Paul G. “Winning the Cold War.”Outdoor Life(Feb.
1993):62+.
Phillips,David. “How Frostbite Performs Its Misery.”Canadi-
an Geographic(Jan./Feb. 1995):20+.
Reamy,Brian V. “Frostbite:Review and Current Concepts.”
Journal of the American Board of Family Practice
(Jan./Feb. 1998):34-40.
Winkelmann,Terry. “The Cold Facts about Frostbite.”Stride
(Winter 1997).
Howard Baker
Frostnip see Frostbite and frostnip
FSH test see Follicle-stimulating hormone
test
Fugue see Dissociative disorders
FUO see Fever of unknown origin
Furosemide see Diuretics
Furunculosis see Boils
Fusobacterium infection see Anaerobic
infections
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1373
Frostbite
and
frostnip
